ClpX(P) Generates Mechanical
Force to Unfold and Translocate
Its Protein Substrates

Rodrigo A. Maillard,1,2,3 Gheorghe Chistol,1,3 Maya Sen,1,4 Maurizio Righini,1,2 Jiongyi Tan,1 Christian M. Kaiser,1,2,3
Courtney Hodges,1,7 Andreas Martin,2,5,* and Carlos Bustamante1,2,3,4,5,6,*
1Jason L. Choy Laboratory of Single-Molecule Biophysics
2QB3 Institute
3Department of Physics
4Department of Chemistry
5Department of Molecular & Cell Biology
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
7Present address: Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
*Correspondence: a.martin@berkeley.edu (A.M.), carlos@alice.berkeley.edu (C.B.)
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.010

SUMMARY

AAA+ unfoldases denature and translocate polypep-
tides into associated peptidases. We report direct
observations of mechanical, force-induced protein
unfolding by the ClpX unfoldase from E. coli, alone,
and in complex with the ClpP peptidase. ClpX
hydrolyzes ATP to generate mechanical force and
translocate polypeptides through its central pore.
Threading is interrupted by pauses that are found
to be off the main translocation pathway. ClpX’s
translocation velocity is force dependent, reaching
a maximum of 80 aa/s near-zero force and vanishing
at around 20 pN. ClpX takes 1, 2, or 3 nm steps, sug-
gesting a fundamental step-size of 1 nm and a certain
degree of
intersubunit coordination. When ClpX
encounters a folded protein,
it either overcomes
this mechanical barrier or slips on the polypeptide
before making another unfolding attempt. Binding
of ClpP decreases the slip probability and enhances
the unfolding efﬁciency of ClpX. Under the action of
ClpXP, GFP unravels cooperatively via a transient
intermediate.

INTRODUCTION

ATP-dependent proteases of the AAA+ (ATPases associated
with various cellular activities) superfamily power the degrada-
tion of abnormal, denatured, or otherwise damaged polypep-
tides, as well as the removal of short-lived regulatory proteins
(King et al., 1996). The hydrolytic active sites of these proteases
are sequestered in the internal chamber of a barrel-shaped
peptidase complex, preventing the diffusion and nonspeciﬁc
folded or even large unfolded polypeptides
degradation of

(Wang et al., 1997). To facilitate speciﬁc protein degradation,
the peptidases pair with energy-dependent hexameric AAA+
unfoldases that recognize appropriately tagged protein sub-
strates and utilize the energy from ATP hydrolysis to unfold
and translocate the polypeptide into the associated peptidase
chamber for degradation (Baker and Sauer, 2006). It has been
suggested previously that AAA+ unfoldases may exert mechan-
ical force to unravel the tertiary and secondary structures of
protein substrates. Even though there have been initial single-
molecule ﬂuorescence studies of ClpX (Shin et al., 2009), direct
evidence for the generation of force and a detailed characteriza-
tion of the mechanochemistry of these molecular machines are
still lacking. Here we investigate the motor properties of ClpX,
a homohexameric AAA+ ATPase from Escherichia coli that
recognizes proteins with a C-terminal ssrA tag and uses cycles
of ATP hydrolysis to unfold and translocate the substrates into
its associated peptidase, ClpP (Gottesman et al., 1998). We
use a single-molecule optical tweezers-based assay to demon-
strate that ClpX generates mechanical
force to unfold its
substrates. We characterize the dynamics of ClpX as it encoun-
ters a folded substrate such as GFP and translocates unfolded
polypeptides through its central processing pore. Furthermore,
we investigate the effects of ClpP on the translocation activity
and unfolding efﬁciency of ClpX. These studies thus provide
important new insight into the general operating principles
used by energy-dependent proteases to unfold and degrade
protein substrates inside the cell.

RESULTS

ClpX Unfolding Trajectories
A dual-trap optical tweezers geometry was used to monitor
real-time trajectories of individual ClpX hexamers or ClpXP
complexes as they unfold and translocate GFP-titin fusion
substrates. In these substrates, either one GFP molecule or
two GFP moieties in tandem separated by either a short or

Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 459

Figure 1. Unfolding and Translocation of
GFP-Titin Fusion Proteins by ClpX and
ClpXP
(A) The geometry of our single-molecule assay in
dual-trap optical
tweezers: ClpX(P) complexes
were immobilized on a streptavidin polystyrene
bead (SA) via a biotin tag on ClpX. The GFP-titin
fusion substrate is covalently linked to a 3 kbp
dsDNA handle with a Dig tag that binds to an
antibody-coated polystyrene bead (AD). All
substrates included one or two GFP molecules
(green) fused to a Ticm-ssrA moiety (red and black).
The blue ﬂexible linker corresponds to the ybbR
tag.
(B–D) GFP unfolding (red arrowheads), motor slips
(black arrowheads) and translocation trajectories
for three different substrates obtained at 7 pN.
(B) Single GFP-titin substrate. (C) Double GFP
substrate with a short linker (10 aa) between the
GFP molecules. (D) Double GFP substrate with
a long ﬂexible linker of 200 aa corresponding
to two Ticm domains (red) between the GFP
molecules.
(E) Basic features of our single-molecule trajecto-
ries. The rip corresponding to a GFP unfolding is
preceded by a pause (orange). After GFP is
unfolded, ClpX translocates the unfolded poly-
peptide chain (green) with occasional pauses
(orange). In all cases the raw data were ﬁltered and
decimated to 1000 Hz (in gray) or 2.5 Hz (in red).
For the protocol describing the attachment of
the dsDNA handle to the fusion substrates, see
Figure S3. In the presence of ATP-g-S, none of the
unfolding or translocation events described in
(B)–(E) were observed (Figure S5).

a long unstructured linker were C-terminally fused to a perma-
nently unfolded ssrA-tagged titin I27 module (Ticm) and attached
by their N termini to a dsDNA handle (Figure 1, see Experimental
Procedures). The DNA-tethered substrates and a single-chain
variant of ClpX were immobilized on different polystyrene beads
coated with anti-digoxigenin antibody and streptavidin, respec-
tively. ClpX was allowed to bind and engage the ssrA-tagged
substrate by bringing the two beads into close proximity in the
presence of saturating ATP and an ATP regeneration system
(Figure 1A).

After successful substrate engagement, we monitored ClpX
unfolding and translocation activities by measuring the changes
in extension between the two beads in passive mode (i.e., the
trap positions are ﬁxed and the force load on the motor is allowed
to vary with motor activity). Traces for the three different
substrates displayed sudden extension gains (rips) followed by
a slower decrease in extension, together resembling a saw-
tooth-like pattern (Figures 1B–1D). We assigned rips either to
ClpX-induced unfolding events of GFP or to temporary disen-
gagement of the motor along the polypeptide backbone track
(Figure 1, red and black arrowheads, respectively). The contin-
uous decrease in extension after a rip was identiﬁed as the trans-
location of the unfolded polypeptide chain through the ClpX
pore. As seen in Figures 1B–1E, translocation is interspersed
by pauses of various lengths. In >95% of all trajectories, translo-

cation events were not observed before the ﬁrst rip. We therefore
conclude that the motor had already translocated the unfolded
Ticm-ssrA segment by the time we started recording ClpX unfold-
ing activity. The changes in extension (in nm) associated with
rips and translocation can be expressed in terms of numbers
of amino acids (aa) using the worm-like chain (WLC) force-
extension formula (Bustamante et al., 1994) (see Experimental
Procedures).

ClpX Translocation and Force Dependence
The characteristics of the translocation process of ClpX are
fundamentally distinct from those of other molecular motors
that have been studied under external force (Bustamante et al.,
2011; Yildiz and Selvin, 2005). For molecular motors moving
along stiff tracks such as dsDNA or microtubules, the track
persistence length (P) is orders of magnitude larger than the
step-size of the motor (for example, PdsDNA = 50 nm compared

to motor step-sizes of just 0.34 and 0.85 nm for RNA polymerase
and f29 packaging motor, respectively [Abbondanzieri et al.,
2005; Mofﬁtt et al., 2009]; and Pmicrotubule = 1 mm compared

to a step-size of 8 nm for kinesin [Svoboda et al., 1993]). We
observe ClpX(P) taking 1 nm steps (see below), which are larger
than the persistence length of the polypeptide track (Ppeptide =
0.65 nm). As a result, on a lengthscale comparable to the step-
size, ClpX(P) translocates a ﬂexible, irregular polymer, whereas

460 Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 2. Motor Properties and Mechano-
chemical Cycle of ClpX(P)
(A) Extension translocation velocity (mean ± SEM
in nm/s) as a function of external force for ClpX (red
symbols) and ClpXP (blue symbols). The dotted
curves represent phenomenological ﬁts to the
data.
(B) Contour length translocation velocity (mean ±
SEM in aa/s) as a function of external force for
ClpX (red symbols) and ClpXP (blue symbols). The
dotted lines extrapolate velocity to zero-external
force.
(C) Histograms of extension velocity for ClpX (red)
and ClpXP (blue) at forces below 13 pN, where
velocity is force independent.
(D) The pause density (or
frequency) during
ClpX(P) translocation (mean ± SEM) as a function
of force.
(E) Correlation plot between ClpX(P) pause density
(mean ± SEM) versus translocation velocity, when
velocity is force independent (<13 pN).
(F) The proposed minimal mechanochemical cycle
for ClpX(P) during translocation, including asso-
ciated force-dependent rates. X(P)n-1, X(P)n, and
X(P)n+1 refer
to consecutive steps of ClpX(P)
during translocation. The translocation rate (kf) and
pause entry (kp),
reﬂected by the pause-free
velocity and pause density, respectively, are force
dependent whereas the exit from a pause (k-p) is
independent of force. For additional information
on pause desnsity and duration, see Table S2.

motors such as kinesin or dsDNA translocases move along much
more rigid, periodic tracks.

The highly elastic nature of unfolded polypeptides and the
unique characteristics of this AAA+ unfoldase compelled us to
deﬁne two distinct quantities: contour velocity (in aa/s) and
extension velocity (in nm/s). Extension velocity refers to the
geometric length (in nm) of the translocated polypeptide chain,
reﬂecting the size of the motor step, whereas contour velocity
measures how many amino acids pass through the ClpX pore
per unit time. For example, 1 nm/s of extension velocity corre-
sponds to 8 aa/s of contour velocity at 4 pN external force
and only 4 aa/s at 13 pN. To illustrate this point, imagine
ClpX as an ant walking on a rubber band stretched under force.
At a low force the ant will traverse the entire length of the rubber
band faster than at a high force, even though the ant maintains
a constant step-size and stepping rate in both cases. The
product of the step-size and the stepping rate in the ant analogy
corresponds to the extension velocity (nm/s) of ClpX, whereas
the amount of rubber traveled by the ant corresponds to the
contour velocity. Although contour velocity (aa/s) has been
widely used in bulk studies (zero-external force), the extension
velocity (nm/s) is necessary to properly characterize polypeptide
translocation under external forces. Because all of our single-
molecule experiments were performed under external force,
most of our discussions refer to the extension velocity (nm/s).
Our analysis yielded a pause-free extension velocity of 8.2 ±
0.3 nm/s (mean ± standard error of the mean [SEM]) for ClpX
at opposing forces between 5–13 pN (Figure 2A, red symbols),
whereas the extension velocity for the ClpXP complex in the

same force range was 6.0 ± 0.3 nm/s (mean ± SEM, Figure 2A,
blue symbols). This 27% decrease in velocity can be explained
by the repression in ATP hydrolysis activity of ClpX when
bound to ClpP (Table S1 available online). We used the contour
velocity (aa/s) to estimate near-zero force velocities of 80 aa/s
and 60 aa/s for ClpX and ClpXP, respectively (Figure 2B). The
latter value is in excellent agreement with bulk estimates for
ClpXP translocation (Martin et al., 2008b).

Interestingly, a rather broad distribution of the mean pause-
free translocation velocities for ClpX and ClpXP was seen
regardless of the force range (Figure 2C), revealing an intrinsic
heterogeneity in the activity of
individual ClpX hexamers.
Although similar heterogeneity has been described previously
for other molecular motor enzymes (Neuman et al., 2003), it is
possible that this dispersion in part reﬂects the chemical and
physical heterogeneity of the unfolded polypeptide track.

ClpXP: Allosteric or Force-Generating Enzyme
A long-standing question about AAA+ unfoldases is whether
these enzymes in fact exert mechanical force or just use an
allosteric binding mechanism to unfold their substrates. To
investigate the unfolding mechanism used by ClpX, we moni-
tored the response of the motor to an opposing force while
translocating a substrate. The force versus velocity plot shows
that ClpX is capable of working against and therefore generating
mechanical
force (Figure 2A, red symbols). This plot also
reveals that the ClpX translocation velocity is nearly constant
up to 13 pN, implying that within this force range and at satu-
rating ATP concentrations, chemical steps (hydrolysis or product

Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 461

Figure 3. ClpXP Translocation Stepping
Displays Coordination between Subunits
(A) Fragment of a ClpXP translocation region
at 10 pN displaying stepping periodicity of
1.0 nm. Raw data ﬁltered and decimated to 500 Hz
are shown in gray, and the raw data boxcar-
ﬁltered to 20 Hz are shown in blue.
(B) The pairwise distance distribution for the trace
in (A) shows a 1 nm periodicity (black arrows).
(C) Side view of
the nucleotide-bound ClpX
hexamer (Glynn et al., 2009) with three subunits
removed to allow visualization of the pore 1 loops
(red) with the critical Tyr153 (stick representation)
shows distinct staggering relative to the pore axis.
The loop of the nucleotide-free subunit 1 is close
to the top of the pore, whereas the loops of the
nucleotide-bound subunits 2 and 3 are in an
intermediate and bottom position, respectively.
The distances between Tyr153 in each of these
staggered positions are 1 nm.
(D and E) Fragment of a ClpXP translocation region
at 14 pN displaying a stepping periodicity of 2.2
and 3.0 nm, respectively.
(F) The pairwise distance distribution for the traces
in (D) and (E) shows the 2.2 and 3.0 nm periodicity
(upper and lower panels, respectively).
For data comparing the ATP hydrolysis rates of
ClpX and ClpXP, see Table S1 and Figure S4.

release) are rate limiting. At opposing external forces exceeding
13 pN, the pause-free velocity decreases monotonically, indi-
cating that conformational changes driving translocation
become rate limiting. We were able to place a lower bound of
20 pN for the stall force of ClpX (Figure 2A). ClpXP’s stall force
and force-velocity dependence is very similar to that of ClpX
(Figure 2A, blue symbols). It has been proposed that protein
unraveling by a AAA+ unfoldase results from the enzyme’s
attempts to translocate the folded structure through its narrow
central pore. Thus, the stall force for translocating a resisting
polypeptide gives a measure of the maximum mechanical force
that ClpX can apply to unfold a substrate.

At high opposing loads, it was possible to observe well-
deﬁned translocation steps for ClpXP (Figure 3). The pairwise
distribution analysis of these traces revealed a remarkable step-
ping periodicity of 1, 2, and 3 nm (Figures 3B and 3F). The
observed 1 nm step is in good agreement with high-resolution
structural data of ClpX (Figure 3C), which show distinct confor-
mations of subunits in different nucleotide states and indicating
potential transitions and loop movements of 1 nm per ClpX
subunit that might lead to substrate translocation (Glynn et al.,
2009). It is assumed that conformational changes of the pore 1
loops with their highly conserved Tyr residues (Figure 3C, red
loops) together with rigid-body movements of subunits in the
ClpX hexamer propel the substrate through the central pore
(Martin et al., 2008a). Based on mutational studies, it was sug-
gested that subunits contribute additively to ClpX activity and
that ATP hydrolysis in one subunit at a time drives the conforma-
tional changes for substrate translocation (Martin et al., 2005).
Our measured extension velocities of 6 and 8 nm/s, along with
the smallest observed step-size of 1 nm, predict hydrolysis rates
 1 for ClpXP and ClpX, respectively
of 360 and 480 ATP,min

(assuming 1 ATP consumed per step). These values are in
good agreement with our bulk measurements of the ATPase
activities during translocation of permanently unstructured
substrates (Table S1 and Figure S4). Our observation of distinct
2 and 3 nm steps (Figures 3D–3F) suggests a coordinated,
near-simultaneous stepping of two or three motor subunits
that cannot be resolved in our measurements.

Power Stroke versus Brownian Ratchet Model
Two general models of motor operation have been proposed for
AAA+ molecular machines. In the Brownian ratchet model, the
motor uses ATP binding/hydrolysis or product release to rectify
its Brownian motion, cross the energy barrier, and move in one
direction (Astumian, 1997). In the power-stroke model, the motor
uses the energy of ATP binding/hydrolysis or product release to
directly drive the motion. Given a lower bound of 20 pN for the
stall force and a step-size of 1 nm, the work performed by a single
ClpX subunit near stall is DWsubunit = 20 pN,nm = 5 kBT per
hydrolyzed ATP. Similar calculations for E. coli RNA polymerase
(Brownian ratchet) and f29 ATPase (power-stroke motor) yield
near-stall work values of 2 kBT and 10 kBT, respectively

(Mofﬁtt et al., 2009; Neuman et al., 2003; Smith et al., 2001).
Because the maximum work done by a ClpX subunit is >5 kBT,
we favor the power-stroke model over the Brownian ratchet for
ClpX. Moreover, we estimated that the free energy of hydrolyzing
one ATP molecule in our buffer is 55 pN,nm. Therefore,
the maximum thermodynamic efﬁciency of ClpX per step is
20 pN,1 nm/55 pN,nm = 35%, within the efﬁciency range of
other power-stroke motors (Smith et al., 2001). Future experi-
ments,
in which the concentration of ATP and hydrolysis
products are changed systematically under varying external
force, will be required to identify the force-generating step of

462 Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

the mechanochemical cycle and will help conﬁrm a power-
stroke mechanism for ClpX.

 1 to 0.045 ± 0.008 nm

Mechanochemistry and Minimal Kinetic Cycle of ClpX
To better understand the mechanochemistry of ClpX, we
analyzed the motor’s pause density (number of pauses per
amino acid translocated) and pause duration during transloca-
tion of the unfolded polypeptide in two opposing force regimes,
5–12 pN and 12–20 pN. We found that higher force loads
increased the probability of ClpX entering a pause state by
 1
a factor of two from 0.025 ± 0.005 nm
(p = 0.008, Table S2). On the other hand, the pause duration
(which reﬂects the probability to exit a pause state) was not
affected by high opposing force load (p = 0.99, Table S2). The
dissimilar effect of the external force on pause entry versus
z
is located
exit can be explained if the transition state, x
very close to the pause state (Tinoco and Bustamante, 2002).
For a displacement (Dx) between the active and pause states,
this means that Dx   x
based on the
pause density distribution (Figure 2D) allowed us to estimate
Dx zx
(mean ± standard deviation [SD], Table
S2). Analysis of pause durations shows that they are distributed
 1, R2 = 0.99),
according to a single exponential (k = 2.3 ± 0.6 s
indicating that exiting from the pause state involves a single
kinetic event.

z z0. Calculation of x

z

= 1.7 ± 0.1 A˚

,

z

In order to establish whether or not pauses are states off the
main translocation pathway of ClpX, we analyzed the natural
ﬂuctuations of the pause-free velocity in a force range that
does not affect the rate of motor translocation and calculated
the correlation between the translocation rate and the probability
of entering a pause (pause density in units of 1/nm). Between
5–12 pN, the translocation rate and pause density were nega-
tively correlated (R2 = –0.5, Table S2). Thus, we observe an
increase in the number of pauses as the pause-free velocity
decreases (Figure 2E), indicating that pausing and translocation
compete kinetically. This type of kinetic competition is expected
when pauses are states off the main translocation pathway.
These results also explain the increase in pause density for
forces between 12–20 pN, as the force-induced reduction of
the motor velocity increases the pause entry probability. The
analysis of pause density, pause duration, and their force depen-
dence was statistically indistinguishable between ClpX and the
ClpXP complex (Table S2). Based on these results, we propose
the kinetic cycle shown in Figure 2F for the translocation of
unfolded polypeptide by ClpXP, as well as the effects of
mechanical forces on the various steps.

ClpX Unfolds GFP via a Well-Deﬁned Intermediate
fundamental question about AAA+ unfoldases is
Another
whether denaturation of single-domain substrates is primarily
determined by the protein’s energy landscape and occurs in
a single cooperative unfolding transition or proceeds through
several unfolding events depending on the presence of distinct
mechanical barriers along the unfolding trajectory. To address
this question, we analyzed the extensions of all rips for the three
different GFP-titin substrates (Figure 1). Unfolding trajectories of
the fusion construct with a single GFP molecule showed mainly
two or three rips, each one followed by translocation of unfolded

polypeptide chain (Figure 1B). On average, we observed twice as
many rips throughout the unfolding trajectory for substrates with
two GFP molecules (Figures 1C and 1D). From all these trajecto-
ries, we clearly recognized identical rip extensions that indicate
a common unfolding signature of GFP (Figure 1, red arrow-
heads). In fact, a histogram of the rip extensions (in number of
amino acids) obtained from all GFP substrates revealed a higher
probability for a transition centered at 207 ± 2 aa (mean ± SEM,
Figure 4A, dark red bars). In addition to this 207 aa rip, we
observed rips whose extensions are less regular and vary
between 20 and 300 aa, with the highest probability at 37 ±
6 aa (mean ± SEM, Figure 4A, pink bars). We interpret these
irregular extensions as slipping events of ClpX backward along
an already unfolded polypeptide (black arrowheads, Figure 1).
Given the extension of the folded GFP molecule (X F), and the
experimentally observed extension change upon GFP unfolding
(DXexp F-U), the true extension of the unfolded GFP (X U) can be
calculated from DXexp F-U = X U   X F (Figure 5, upper portion).
Based on the crystal structure (Ormo¨ et al., 1996; Yang et al.,
1996), the extension of folded GFP in our experimental geometry
is 2.4 nm, equivalent to 13 ± 1 aa in the force range of 6–10 pN.
Thus, the DXexp F-U = 207 aa rip corresponds to the unfolding of
220 ± 3 aa (mean ± SEM). This result is in excellent agreement
with the number of amino acids that show well-deﬁned
secondary structures in GFP (residues 5 to 227, Figure 7A). To
corroborate the assignment of GFP unfolding events in our
trajectories, we used the speciﬁc extension signature of the
construct with two Ticm domains inserted between two GFP
molecules. This long stretch of unfolded polypeptide (200 aa)
served as an independent internal marker to identify the unfold-
ing event of the ﬁrst C-terminal GFP before the long translocation
(Figure 1D, red arrowheads). When we analyzed the size distribu-
tion of those rips immediately preceding the translocation of the
long unfolded polypeptide, we observed a peak at 207 aa (Fig-
ure S1), thus corroborating our previous structural assignment.
Close inspection of the GFP unfolding events showed that the
207 aa rip consisted of two steps, separated by a transient inter-
mediate with a lifetime of 180 ms (Figure 4B, black arrow). In
fact, this ‘‘rip-transition-rip’’ signature (Figure 4C) was present
in >70% of all events of the 207 aa peak. The presence of a
well-deﬁned transition indicates that the ClpX-induced mechan-
ical unfolding of GFP from the C terminus proceeds via a
short-lived intermediate state. Furthermore, a plot of the size
distribution of each rip segment revealed that the ﬁrst rip is
107 ± 2 aa, whereas the second portion consists of 100 ± 2 aa
(mean ± SEM, Figures 4D and 4F, respectively).

In order to estimate the secondary structures involved in such
an intermediate, we mapped the ﬁrst and second segments of
the 207 aa rip onto the tertiary structure of GFP. Given the dimen-
sion of fully native GFP (X F), the dimension of the folded portion
the unfolding intermediate (X I), and the experimentally
of
observed extension change upon the unfolding of the ﬁrst,
C-terminal GFP segment (DX exp F-I), we can compute the true
extension (X U1) corresponding to the ﬁrst rip using the following
relation: DX exp F-I = X U1   (X F   X I) (Figure 5). Then X U1 can
easily be converted into amino acids via the WLC formalism.
Because the dimensions of the remaining folded structure (i.e.,
the unfolding intermediate) are not known, we deﬁned the lower

Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 463

Figure 4. Unraveling of GFP by ClpX(P) Shows
a Well-Deﬁned Structural Transition and
Reveals a Single-Unfolding Intermediate
(A) The distribution of rip sizes (in aa) for all observed
GFP unfolding events (red, n = 107) and slips (light
red, n = 250) in ClpX and ClpXP traces.
(B) ClpX trace containing the unfolding of the ﬁrst
GFP in the double GFP construct with the long linker
(Figure 1D). The unfolding event is followed by the
translocation of the unfolded GFP and the long
linker. Raw data ﬁltered and decimated to 800 Hz.
(C) A detailed view of the short-lived GFP unfolding
intermediate (black arrow in panel B).
(D) Histogram of
unfolding.
(E) The distribution of GFP unfolding intermediate
lifetimes is well described by a single exponential.
Dashed lines represent 95% conﬁdence interval of
the ﬁt.
(F) Histogram of the second rip size during GFP
unfolding.
For the rip size distribution before the long trans-
location marker
(panel B), see Figure S1, and
for side-by-side comparison of ClpX and ClpXP
unfolding of GFP, see Figure S2.

rip size during GFP

the ﬁrst

(the size of
the unfolding intermediate
when unfolded), we can calculate the
observed change in extension upon unfold-
ing of the intermediate DX exp I-U using the
following expression: DX exp I-U = X U2   X I
(Figure 5). Thus, X U2 = 100 aa + 23 aa =
123 aa. Unfolding 123 amino acids starting
at residue 130 would end at position 7 (as
counted from the N terminus), which is in
excellent agreement with structural data
for GFP that show Glu5 to be the ﬁrst residue involved in
secondary structures (Figure 7A). Analysis of the structural tran-
sitions of GFP when unfolded by the ClpXP protease is essen-
tially indistinguishable from that of ClpX alone (Figure S2).

In addition to providing a structural assignment for the unfolding
of GFP, we also sought to investigate the dynamic components
during GFP unraveling by ClpX. The distributions of the dwell
times preceding the ﬁrst and second rip segments are well
described by a single exponential (Figure 6A and Figure 4E,
respectively). However, the time constant for the ﬁrst rip is nine
times longer than for the second one (1.7 ± 0.3 s versus 0.18 ±
0.03 s). We interpret the time constant of the ﬁrst rip dwell as the
average time required by ClpX to destabilize and unravel the fully
folded GFP molecule. In contrast, the second rip time constant
corresponds to the time required for the spontaneous unfolding
of the 130 N-terminal residues of GFP. During the 180 ms lifetime
of this N-terminal intermediate, ClpX would be able to translocate
only about 15 residues of the chain unraveled in the ﬁrst step of
GFP unfolding. Therefore, by the time the N-terminal portion of
GFP unfolds, ClpX is still several nm away and unlikely to play
a major role in this second stage of GFP unfolding.

Interestingly, for the ClpXP complex, the time constant for
the ﬁrst stage of GFP unfolding was about ﬁve times longer

and upper bounds to X I as 2.4 and 4.2 nm, which correspond to
the short and long axes of the folded GFP. In the force range of
6–10 pN, these numbers translate into 13 and 23 aa, respec-
tively. Therefore, the ﬁrst rip of 107 aa corresponds to the unfold-
ing of a C-terminal GFP segment anywhere between 97 and 107
residues, leaving between 120 and 130 N-terminal residues still
folded (see Figure 7A).

Based on the topology map of GFP, an unfolding intermediate
with the N-terminal residues 1–120 still folded would require part
of b strand 6 to be unstructured. We do not favor this interme-
diate boundary because unfolding of b strands is highly cooper-
ative, as observed in previous mechanical unfolding experiments
(Marszalek et al., 1999). In contrast, residue 130 is located within
a long loop, near the end of b strand 6. Thus, we surmise that
ClpX unfolds 97 aa from the C terminus corresponding to
b strands 7–11, generating a GFP unfolding intermediate with
130 N-terminal residues still structured (b strands 1–6).

In order to corroborate the structural elements assigned to the
unfolding intermediate at the N terminus of GFP, we analyzed the
second segment of the 207 aa rip (Figure 4C). As described
above, we estimated the dimensions of the folded portion of
the GFP intermediate (X I) to be 4.2 nm or 23 aa at 6–10 pN.
Calling X U2 the true extension corresponding to the second rip

464 Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

XF 

Xexp F-U 

a consequence of the reduced ATP hydrolysis rate and pulling
frequency of ClpX when bound to ClpP.

F 

I 

U 

Xexp F-I 

XU1 

XI 

Extension 

Contour Length 

Xexp F-I 
Xexp I-U 
Xexp F-U 
XF=2.4nm

XI=4.2nm

XU1 

XU2 

XU1+XU2 

~ 107aa (obs) 

~100aa (obs) 

~207aa (obs) 

~13aa (struct) 

~23aa (struct) 

~97aa (true) 

~123aa (true) 

~220aa (true) 

 
)

m
n
(
 
n
o
i
s
n
e
t
x
E

F 

Xexp I-U 

XU2 

U 

I 

Time (s) 

Figure 5. A Schematic Representation of GFP Unfolding via a Short-
Lived Intermediate
(F), (I), and (U) denote the folded, intermediate, and unfolded conformations of
GFP. DX quantities correspond to experimentally observed extension changes
(obs). X F and X I are the dimensions of the folded and intermediate states of
GFP, estimated from structural data (struct). X U1 and X U2 are the true exten-
sions (true) corresponding to the unfolding of the ﬁrst and second portions of
GFP (shown as ﬂexible chains in green and purple, respectively). The true
extension of the entire unfolded GFP molecule is X U1 + X U2. The table provides
reference values estimated for 6–10 pN. Bottom right panel displays a char-
acteristic ‘‘rip-transition-rip’’ during GFP unfolding.

compared to that for ClpX alone (9.1 ± 1.4 s versus 1.7 ± 0.3 s,
Figures 6B and 6A, respectively). The former value is similar to
the previously reported time constant t = 5.6 s for the loss of
GFP ﬂuorescence in single-turnover degradation (Martin et al.,
2008b). These degradation experiments had also suggested
that ClpX initiates GFP unfolding by extracting the C-terminal
b strand 11 and trapping it through at least four subsequent
translocation steps. This requirement for rapid translocation
leads to a strictly nonlinear dependence of GFP unfolding on the
rate of ClpX ATP hydrolysis. In fact, reducing the ATP hydrolysis
rate by 30% was found to decrease GFP degradation 3-fold
(Martin et al., 2008b). Therefore, our observed 5-fold difference
in unfolding rate between ClpX and ClpXP is consistent with
the 30% lower translocation velocity of ClpXP at all forces
in turn,
observed in our experiments (Figure 2A), which is,

ClpP Enhances the Unfolding Activity of ClpX
Besides rips corresponding to successful GFP unfolding, the
trajectories for all fusion substrates showed frequent slippage
events, in which ClpX apparently failed to unfold GFP, disen-
gaged the substrate, and moved backward along the poly-
peptide track (Figure 1, black arrowheads). Such behavior is
consistent with previous degradation studies that have shown
that hard-to-unfold substrates with a short ssrA tag are
frequently released and rebound by ClpXP before successful
unfolding (Kenniston et al., 2005). We can imagine two possible
mechanisms by which ClpX can resume tugging at the substrate
after a failed unfolding attempt. Either it can remain engaged to
the substrate, making an immediate new unfolding attempt, or
it can completely disengage the polypeptide and diffuse back-
ward for a short time before re-engaging the substrate. The ﬁrst
scenario is beyond the spatiotemporal resolution of the present
experiments. The second scenario should manifest itself as rips
of several amino acids due to the applied opposing load. We
therefore sought to investigate in greater detail the motor slips
observed during GFP unfolding.
The probability distribution of slip extensions for ClpX peaked
at 30–40 aa but also displayed longer slips well beyond 50 aa
(Figure 6C, lower panel). Because ClpX alone cannot hydrolyze
polypeptides, it can slip backward up to the entire length of the
already translocated polypeptide chain. Remarkably,
the
observed slip distribution for the ClpXP complex also peaked
between 30–40 aa; however, it lacked longer slips (Figure 6C,
upper panel). This absence of longer slips for ClpXP is expected,
as the ClpP peptidase constantly trims the polypeptide chain
inside its proteolytic cavity down to 38 aa, a length sufﬁcient
to span the distance between the ClpX-pore entry and the
ClpP active sites (Martin et al., 2008b). Slips of ClpXP longer
than 38 aa result, therefore, in tether rupture. The fact that the
distribution of slip sizes peak between 30–40 aa for both ClpX
and ClpXP indicate that the time ClpX takes to re-engage the
substrate is the same with or without ClpP. The size of slips
depends on the product of the substrate re-engagement time
by the motor and the speed at which the polypeptide is dragged
out of the pore. Thus, the presence of an external force in our
experiments greatly ampliﬁes the sizes of the slips observed
here relative to those that occur in the cell and in bulk assays
(Martin et al., 2008a).

Importantly, we found that ClpXP complexes are much less
prone to slipping compared to ClpX hexamers alone: for ClpX,
70% of the rips observed correspond to slips and the rest to
unfolding events, whereas for ClpXP, this number is only 27%.
Thus, binding of ClpP dramatically decreases the slip frequency
of ClpX, potentially due to additional contacts between the poly-
peptide and the extended processing pore of ClpXP. These
additional interactions may prevent substrate release after an
unsuccessful unfolding attempt.

We also analyzed the slip entry rate as a function of force for
ClpX alone and in complex with ClpP. The slip entry rate is
deﬁned as the inverse of the average waiting time before a slip
occurs in front of a mechanical barrier. We found that the slip

Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 465

Figure 6. ClpXP Is a More Robust Motor with
Higher Unfolding Efﬁciency and Lower Slip-
ping Frequency than ClpX Alone
(A and B) The dwell time before each ClpX- or ClpXP-
mediated unfolding event is exponentially distrib-
uted. Dashed lines represent 95% conﬁdence
interval of the ﬁt.
(C) Slip size histograms for ClpX (red) and ClpXP
(blue).
(D) The slip entry rate (mean ± SEM) for ClpX (red)
and ClpXP (blue). Slip entry rate is the inverse of the
average waiting time before a slip occurs.

unfolding experiments using atomic force
microscopy (AFM)
(Mickler et al., 2007;
Perez-Jimenez et al., 2006). Given that
typical protein unfolding forces in AFM
experiments are between 50–150 pN, we
expect that the corresponding unfolding
forces should be at least ﬁve times smaller
under the loading rates applied by ClpXP.
Although the motor is hence strong enough
to unfold most proteins mechanically, it is
possible that ClpX also uses allosteric
contacts to distort the local structure of its substrates and
thereby weaken their thermodynamic stabilities.

The single-molecule trajectories obtained here allow us to
address two additional
important questions about the motor
properties of ClpX, namely, the mechanisms involved in motor
slow-down and motor stall under force. First, why does the
motor pause-free velocity decrease at forces above 13 pN?
One possible explanation is that the external force slows down
the mechanochemical cycle of the motor and decreases the
frequency of pulling events. Alternatively, high forces could
cause the translocation loops of individual subunits of ClpX to
slip on the substrate, resulting in futile translocation attempts
that fail to move the substrate through the central pore. We favor
the former explanation because in >98% of all traces we do not
observe any small rips that may be indicative of motor slippage
during translocation. In fact, even if we could not resolve these
rips, their presence should manifest itself as an increased
‘‘noise’’ in velocity at high force, which we do not observe.

The second question concerns the mechanism of motor stall-
ing. Is the maximum force generated by the motor equivalent to
its thermodynamic stall force (Bustamante et al., 2001) or an
‘‘operational’’ stall force at which the motor is rendered unable
to translocate on its track (due, for example, to mechanical un-
folding of the motor itself, slippage on the track, etc.)? At forces
around 20 pN, near the stall, a large fraction of the traces (>80%)
are interrupted by tether ruptures that appear to be caused by
backsliding of the entire, already translocated polypeptide out
of the ClpX(P) motor pore. In support of this interpretation we
observed that the motor slip entry rate increases signiﬁcantly
from 1 s
 1 at forces near the stall
(Figure 6D, p = 0.006, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).

 1 at forces <13 pN to 3.5 s

Thus, it seems likely that the reduction of the motor’s ATPase
rate and frequency of pulling events at higher opposing loads

entry rate for ClpXP is 5–10 times lower than that of ClpX at all
forces (Figure 6D). For instance, when using the double GFP +
long linker substrate, ClpXP was able to process both GFP mole-
cules in 45% of all traces, whereas ClpX alone was successful in
only 10%–15% of the cases. These numbers are in good agree-
ment with the probabilities of successful unfolding versus slips
determined above. For ClpX, the probability of unfolding both
GFP molecules within a single trace is 0.27,0.27 (10%),
whereas for ClpXP it is 0.70,0.70 (50%). Because in the cell
there is no opposing force on the substrate, we surmise that
the probabilities described above would correspond to a lower
bound for the successful unfolding and translocation of this
tandem substrate.

DISCUSSION

Our studies provide direct experimental evidence that ClpX is
able to generate mechanical force to induce protein denatur-
ation. Moreover, the force dependence of the motor velocity
favors a power-stroke mechanism for ClpX. Although the stall
force of the motor is just 20 pN, this force should be sufﬁcient
to unfold most cellular proteins, given the low loading rates at
which AAA+ unfoldases may operate in the cell. The loading
rate is a measure of the speed at which the force is applied to
the protein substrate. Because protein unfolding always involves
the stochastic thermal crossing of an energy barrier, pulling at
lower loading rates gives the substrate more time to unfold at
low forces. The most likely force at which a protein unfolds
scales as the log of the loading rate (Bustamante et al., 2004).
We estimate that the loading rate at which ClpX pulls the
folded substrate in our experimental conditions is 0.15 pN/s
(Extended Experimental Procedures) and is ﬁve orders of
magnitude smaller than the loading rate in mechanical protein

466 Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

A

138 

135 

217 

208 

171 

174 

C 

10 

11 

148 

8 

9 

7 

103 

100 

128 

22 

25 

2nd rip:  -strands 
6 1 unfolded 

(3) 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

48 

57 

(2) 

159 

187 

92 
115 

118 

12 

87 

83 

5 
1 

3 

64 

36 

40 

-17 

(1) 

1st rip:  -strands 
11 7 unfolded 

199 

155 

227 

230 

B

= 9.1 s

Force-induced 

unfolding 

 = 180 ms 

spontaneous  

unfolding 

 ~ 3 s

(1) ClpXP
tugging on GFP 

(2) short-lived GFP 
unfolding intermediate 

(3) Translocation and  
degradation of unfolded GFP 

Figure 7. Model for the Mechanical Unfold-
ing of GFP by ClpX(P)
(A) A two-dimensional representation of the folded
GFP topology: b strands 11/7 are shown in
green, and b strands 6/1 in purple. The ybbR tag
is in blue.
(B) A schematic diagram of GFP (green/purple)
unfolding by a ClpX hexamer (orange) in complex
with ClpP (blue). The left panel shows the entire
complex with an intact GFP molecule before
unfolding. The center-left panel shows the
unfolding intermediate (in purple). The center-right
panel shows the fully unfolded GFP after
the spontaneous unfolding of the intermediate.
The right panel shows ClpXP toward the end of
unfolded GFP translocation. The GFP structure
has been enlarged by 53 for display purposes.
(C) Assignment of the stages of GFP unfolding and
translocation by ClpXP (in C-to-N direction) to
a typical single-molecule trajectory. After several
unfolding attempts (1), ClpXP unravels b strands
11/7 of GFP, generating a short-lived interme-
diate (2). After the spontaneous unfolding of the
remaining GFP structure (b strands 6/1), ClpXP
translocates the unfolded polypeptide through its
central pore into ClpP (3). Note that ClpXP
commenced translocation while the GFP unfold-
ing intermediate was still present (2). The number
labeling (1–3) scheme is the same as in panel B.

increases the chance of complete loss of grip and disengage-
ment of the substrate, causing an operational stall.

ClpX(P) maintains a constant extension velocity (nm/s)
up to forces of 13 pN (Figure 2A). At low forces ClpX translocates
8 aa per 1 nm step compared to only 4 aa/step at 13 pN.
Because the number of residues translocated per step changes
as a function of external force, the 1 nm step-size of ClpX must
be dictated by the relevant conformational change of the motor
during the power stroke rather than any spatial periodic features
of the substrate. Moreover, because of the chemical heteroge-
neity of the track, it is likely that nonspeciﬁc steric contacts
between ClpX pore loops and the substrate are more important
than speciﬁc chemical interactions when threading an unfolded
polypeptide through the central pore. These nonspeciﬁc steric
contacts might be key to ClpX’s ability to translocate its irregular
and diverse polypeptide substrates in either C-to-N or N-to-C
direction (Barkow et al., 2009; Martin et al., 2008a).

Our analysis of the ClpX-induced unfolding of GFP in the C-to-
N terminal direction revealed a well-deﬁned, short-lived interme-
diate (Figure 7). This intermediate, comprising the N-terminal 130
residues that form b strands 1 thru 6, is in good agreement with
previous mechanical unfolding experiments of GFP (Bertz et al.,
2008; Perez-Jimenez et al., 2006). Importantly, ClpX and ClpXP
lead to the formation of the same transient intermediate (Fig-
ure 4E and Figure S2H), indicating that the unfolding mechanism
is determined largely by the energy landscape of the substrate
and the presence of cooperative folding units that unravel after
ClpX or ClpXP disrupt critical interactions at the C terminus.

AAA+ unfoldases target structurally and functionally diverse
proteins in all cells. Moreover, their client proteins are found
not only in a folded, soluble conformation, but also in hyperstable
misfolded or aggregated states (Horwich et al., 1999). These
molecular machines must therefore utilize efﬁcient mechanisms
to unravel proteins with a wide range of thermodynamic stabili-
ties, topologies, and sequence characteristics. The present
study shows that ClpX(P) is able to generate and apply mechan-
ical forces sufﬁcient to unfold most target proteins.

ClpX processes substrates in a linear fashion, applying force
and overcoming only the local mechanical barriers encountered
along the unfolding trajectory of the protein. As a result, it is the
linear proﬁle of these barriers, as deﬁned by the pulling end and
the topology of the substrate, but not the global protein stability
that determines the kinetics of substrate processing. Because
the chance of slipping on the polypeptide track increases signif-
icantly near the stall force, ClpX will work on a hard-to-unfold
substrate much longer, repeatedly tugging and slipping until an
unfolding attempt is successful. Mechanical unfolding ultimately
involves the thermally induced crossing of an energy barrier. By
maintaining a constant tugging on a hard-to-unfold substrate,
ClpX decreases the magnitude of this barrier while increasing
the chance that sooner or later a thermal ﬂuctuation within the
protein substrate will allow its crossing. When facing a high
mechanical barrier, the motor will thus require more time and
consume larger amounts of ATP before such spontaneous
crossing occurs. In this way, the motor is able to process proteins
with a wide range of thermodynamic and mechanical stabilities.

Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 467

As the ClpX motor shares its basic design and operating prin-
ciples with other AAA+ unfoldases, including the prokaryotic
ClpA, ClpB, HslU, FtsH, or Lon and the eukaryotic 26S protea-
some, it is conceivable that all these enzymes utilize very similar
mechanisms to generate mechanical
force and disrupt the
secondary, tertiary, and quarternary structures of their protein
substrates. However, it remains to be determined how differ-
ences in the rate of ATP hydrolysis, the length of the central
processing channel, or the heterohexameric versus homohexa-
meric architecture of the AAA+ unfoldases affect pulling forces,
translocation velocities, and the frequency of pausing or slipping
on hard-to-unfold substrates.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Protein Modiﬁcations and dsDNA-Handle Attachment
to Protein Substrates
Single-chain ClpX hexamers and GFP-titin I27 fusion proteins were expressed
and puriﬁed as described previously (Martin et al., 2005, 2008b). In all fusion
substrates, the titin I27 domains were permanently unfolded (Ticm) by carbox-
ymethylation (Martin et al., 2008b). Single-chain ClpX hexamers included an
avi tag that was biotinylated using puriﬁed BirA in vitro (Chen et al., 2005).
We covalently attached a 3 kbp dsDNA handle to the N termini of the GFP-
Ticm fusion proteins by utilizing the ybbR tag/Sfp system (Yin et al., 2005). A
detailed protocol for the dsDNA-handle attachment to the protein substrates
is described in Extended Experimental Procedures (Figures S3A and S3B).

Single-Molecule Sample Preparation
All single-molecule unfolding trajectories were obtained in ClpX-100 buffer
(25 mM HEPES-KCl, pH 7.4, 20 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, and 1 mM EDTA),
5 mM ATP and ATP regeneration system (16 mM creatine phosphate and
32 mg/ml of creatine phosphokinase) (Kenniston et al., 2005). Before an exper-
iment, the buffer was passed through a 0.22 mm pore ﬁlter and degassed
thoroughly. In the presence of ATP-g-S, tethers between ClpX and the DNA-
tethered substrate were obtained but no rips or continuous decrease in
extension were observed. Details of the control experiments with ATP-g-S
are described in Extended Experimental Procedures (Figure S5). Tethers in
the absence of ATP or ATP-g-S were not observed. Experiments conducted
with ClpP contained 500 nM in all chambers to ensure formation of the ClpXP
complex (Kd = 90 nM) (Joshi et al., 2004).

Single-Molecule Data Collection
Data was collected in a dual-trap instrument with differential detection (Mofﬁtt
et al., 2006). Raw single-molecule data were acquired at 2000 Hz. Sudden
extension changes and translocation (in nm) were converted into polypeptide
contour length (in amino acids) in a two-step procedure. We ﬁrst removed the
extension contribution of the 3 kbp dsDNA handle using the WLC formalism
(Extended Experimental Procedures). We then calculated the unfolded poly-
peptide contour length using the WLC model and Ppeptide = 0.65 nm (Cecconi
et al., 2005).

Single-Molecule Data Analysis
During data acquisition, we monitored the dsDNA handle + polypeptide
extension. For our 3 kbp dsDNA handle, the expected extension is between
930–1000 nm in the force range of our experiments (4–20 pN, respectively).
Any tethers with extensions out of the expected range were discarded. During
data analysis we had an additional internal control—the characteristic signa-
ture of GFP unfolding by ClpX(P): a double rip with a short-lived intermediate in
between (Figure 4C). If the two rips did not add up to the expected 200 aa
change in contour length, we discarded the trace. A total of 101 ClpX traces
and 62 ClpXP traces passed our screening and were used in further analysis.
We analyzed three distinct events (Figure 1E): the time before a sudden
extension gain occurs, the length of the sudden change in extension (rip)
caused by substrate unfolding or motor slippage, and the continuous
decrease in length due to translocation of the unfolded polypeptide (transloca-

468 Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc.

tion velocity). In the analysis of pause durations before a sudden rip, we only
included pauses after the ﬁrst rip is observed; that is, pauses preceding rip
events # 2, 3, and so on within a single trajectory. This is due to the uncertainty
in the time at which a tether between ClpX and the substrate was formed
and the time before the ﬁrst rip was observed. In order to locate the occurrence
of sudden rips and their extensions, we analyzed our traces using the
Student’s t test (Figure S5). For velocity calculation, data were ﬁltered and
decimated to 2.5 Hz, and any pauses longer than 1 s were removed. Velocity
data for a given force range were computed for each molecule. Velocity values
corresponding to different molecules were used to compute the mean and
standard error. The calculated velocity was essentially the same for ﬁlter band-
widths ranging from 1 Hz to 10 Hz.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, ﬁve
ﬁgures, and two tables and can be found with this article online at doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.010.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Lacramioara Bintu, Craig Hetherington, and Phillip Elms for helpful
discussions. M.S. acknowledges support from the NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship. C.M.K. acknowledges support from the QB3 Institute (Distin-
guished Postdoctoral Fellowship) and the NIH K99 Award (5K99GM086516).
This research was supported in part by the Searle Scholars Program (A.M.),
the NIH grant R01-GM0325543, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (C.B.).

Received: January 31, 2011
Revised: March 29, 2011
Accepted: April 14, 2011
Published: April 28, 2011

REFERENCES

Abbondanzieri, E.A., Greenleaf, W.J., Shaevitz, J.W., Landick, R., and Block,
S.M. (2005). Direct observation of base-pair stepping by RNA polymerase.
Nature 438, 460–465.

Astumian, R.D. (1997). Thermodynamics and kinetics of a Brownian motor.
Science 276, 917–922.

Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2006). ATP-dependent proteases of bacteria:
recognition logic and operating principles. Trends Biochem. Sci. 31, 647–653.

Barkow, S.R., Levchenko, I., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2009). Polypeptide
translocation by the AAA+ ClpXP protease machine. Chem. Biol. 16, 605–612.

Bertz, M., Kunfermann, A., and Rief, M. (2008). Navigating the folding energy
landscape of green ﬂuorescent protein. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 47,
8192–8195.

Bustamante, C., Marko, J.F., Siggia, E.D., and Smith, S. (1994). Entropic elas-
ticity of lambda-phage DNA. Science 265, 1599–1600.

Bustamante, C., Keller, D., and Oster, G. (2001). The physics of molecular
motors. Acc. Chem. Res. 34, 412–420.

Bustamante, C., Chemla, Y.R., Forde, N.R., and Izhaky, D. (2004). Mechanical
processes in biochemistry. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 73, 705–748.

Bustamante, C., Cheng, W., and Meija, Y.X. (2011). Revisiting the central
dogma one molecule at a time. Cell 144, 480–497.

Cecconi, C., Shank, E.A., Bustamante, C., and Marqusee, S. (2005). Direct
observation of the three-state folding of a single protein molecule. Science
309, 2057–2060.

Chen, I., Howarth, M., Lin, W., and Ting, A.Y. (2005). Site-speciﬁc labeling of
cell surface proteins with biophysical probes using biotin ligase. Nat. Methods
2, 99–104.

Glynn, S.E., Martin, A., Nager, A.R., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2009). Struc-
tures of asymmetric ClpX hexamers reveal nucleotide-dependent motions in
a AAA+ protein-unfolding machine. Cell 139, 744–756.

Mofﬁtt, J.R., Chemla, Y.R., Aathavan, K., Grimes, S., Jardine, P.J., Anderson,
D.L., and Bustamante, C. (2009). Intersubunit coordination in a homomeric ring
ATPase. Nature 457, 446–450.

Gottesman, S., Roche, E., Zhou, Y., and Sauer, R.T. (1998). The ClpXP and
ClpAP proteases degrade proteins with carboxy-terminal peptide tails added
by the SsrA-tagging system. Genes Dev. 12, 1338–1347.

Horwich, A.L., Weber-Ban, E.U., and Finley, D. (1999). Chaperone rings in
protein folding and degradation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 11033–11040.

Joshi, S.A., Hersch, G.L., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2004). Communication
between ClpX and ClpP during substrate processing and degradation. Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol. 11, 404–411.

Kenniston, J.A., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2005). Partitioning between
unfolding and release of native domains during ClpXP degradation determines
substrate selectivity and partial processing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102,
1390–1395.

King, R.W., Deshaies, R.J., Peters, J.M., and Kirschner, M.W. (1996). How
proteolysis drives the cell cycle. Science 274, 1652–1659.

Marszalek, P.E., Lu, H., Li, H., Carrion-Vazquez, M., Oberhauser, A.F.,
Schulten, K., and Fernandez, J.M. (1999). Mechanical unfolding intermediates
in titin modules. Nature 402, 100–103.

Martin, A., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2005). Rebuilt AAA + motors reveal
operating principles for ATP-fuelled machines. Nature 437, 1115–1120.

Martin, A., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2008a). Pore loops of the AAA+ ClpX
machine grip substrates to drive translocation and unfolding. Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 15, 1147–1151.

Martin, A., Baker, T.A., and Sauer, R.T. (2008b). Protein unfolding by a AAA+
protease is dependent on ATP-hydrolysis rates and substrate energy
landscapes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15, 139–145.

Mickler, M., Dima, R.I., Dietz, H., Hyeon, C., Thirumalai, D., and Rief, M. (2007).
Revealing the bifurcation in the unfolding pathways of GFP by using single-
molecule experiments and simulations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104,
20268–20273.

Mofﬁtt, J.R., Chemla, Y.R., Izhaky, D., and Bustamante, C. (2006). Differential
detection of dual traps improves the spatial resolution of optical tweezers.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 9006–9011.

Neuman, K.C., Abbondanzieri, E.A., Landick, R., Gelles, J., and Block, S.M.
(2003). Ubiquitous transcriptional pausing is independent of RNA polymerase
backtracking. Cell 115, 437–447.

Ormo¨ , M., Cubitt, A.B., Kallio, K., Gross, L.A., Tsien, R.Y., and Remington, S.J.
(1996). Crystal structure of the Aequorea victoria green ﬂuorescent protein.
Science 273, 1392–1395.

Perez-Jimenez, R., Garcia-Manyes, S., Ainavarapu, S.R., and Fernandez, J.M.
(2006). Mechanical unfolding pathways of the enhanced yellow ﬂuorescent
protein revealed by single molecule force spectroscopy. J. Biol. Chem. 281,
40010–40014.

Shin, Y., Davis, J.H., Brau, R.R., Martin, A., Kenniston, J.A., Baker, T.A., Sauer,
R.T., and Lang, M.J. (2009). Single-molecule denaturation and degradation
of proteins by the AAA+ ClpXP protease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106,
19340–19345.

Smith, D.E., Tans, S.J., Smith, S.B., Grimes, S., Anderson, D.L., and Busta-
mante, C. (2001). The bacteriophage straight phi29 portal motor can package
DNA against a large internal force. Nature 413, 748–752.

Svoboda, K., Schmidt, C.F., Schnapp, B.J., and Block, S.M. (1993). Direct
observation of kinesin stepping by optical trapping interferometry. Nature
365, 721–727.

Tinoco, I., Jr., and Bustamante, C. (2002). The effect of force on thermody-
namics and kinetics of single molecule reactions. Biophys. Chem. 101-102,
513–533.

Wang, J., Hartling, J.A., and Flanagan, J.M. (1997). The structure of ClpP at
2.3 A resolution suggests a model for ATP-dependent proteolysis. Cell 91,
447–456.

Yang, F., Moss, L.G., and Phillips, G.N., Jr. (1996). The molecular structure of
green ﬂuorescent protein. Nat. Biotechnol. 14, 1246–1251.

Yildiz, A., and Selvin, P.R. (2005). Kinesin: walking, crawling or sliding along?
Trends Cell Biol. 15, 112–120.

Yin, J., Straight, P.D., McLoughlin, S.M., Zhou, Z., Lin, A.J., Golan, D.E.,
Kelleher, N.L., Kolter, R., and Walsh, C.T. (2005). Genetically encoded short
peptide tag for versatile protein labeling by Sfp phosphopantetheinyl trans-
ferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15815–15820.

Cell 145, 459–469, April 29, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Inc. 469

