Single-Molecule Analysis of Dynein
Processivity and Stepping Behavior

Samara L. Reck-Peterson,2 Ahmet Yildiz,2,3 Andrew P. Carter,2,3 Arne Gennerich,2 Nan Zhang,1,2
and Ronald D. Vale1,2,*
1 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
2 Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 94158 USA
3 These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Contact: vale@cmp.ucsf.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2006.05.046

SUMMARY

Cytoplasmic dynein, the 1.2 MDa motor driving
minus-end-directed motility, has been reported
to move processively along microtubules, but
its mechanism of motility remains poorly under-
stood. Here, using S. cerevisiae to produce re-
combinant dynein with a chemically controlled
dimerization switch, we show by structural
and single-molecule analysis that processivity
requires two dynein motor domains but not dy-
nein’s tail domain or any associated subunits.
Dynein advances most frequently in 8 nm steps,
although longer as well as side and backward
steps are observed. Individual motor domains
show a different stepping pattern, which is
best explained by the two motor domains shuf-
ﬂing in an alternating manner between rear and
forward positions. Our results suggest that cy-
toplasmic dynein moves processively through
the coordination of its two motor domains, but
its variable step size and direction suggest
a considerable diffusional component to its
step, which differs from Kinesin-1 and is more
akin to myosin VI.

INTRODUCTION

Cytoplasmic dynein performs nearly all minus-end-di-
rected microtubule-based movement in most eukaryotic
cells; its many functions include spindle formation and
chromosome segregation and the transport of numerous
cargoes including viruses, RNA, signaling molecules,
and organelles (Vallee et al., 2004). The partial
loss of
cytoplasmic dynein function has been implicated in lissen-
cephaly, schizophrenia, and motor neuron degeneration
(Gerdes and Katsanis, 2005). Thus, dissecting the molec-
ular mechanism of dynein motility is essential for under-
standing a wide array of biological processes and the
molecular basis of several types of human disease.

Unlike the two other cytoskeletal motor protein families,
kinesin and myosin, for which detailed structural and
mechanistic models exist, relatively little is known about
the mechanism of dynein motility. Moreover, whereas
kinesin and myosin share many mechanistic similarities
because of their common evolutionary origin (Vale and
Milligan, 2000), dynein is a divergent evolutionary branch
of the AAA+ family of ATPases (Neuwald et al., 1999).
Thus, dynein is likely to share more mechanistic features
with this group of ATP-hydrolyzing protein ‘‘unfoldases’’
than with the kinesin/myosin motors. Like many other
AAA+ ATPases, dynein’s motor domain is composed of
a ring of 6–7 AAA+ domains, which, in the case of dynein,
are concatenated into a single large polypeptide (Burgess
et al., 2003; Samso and Koonce, 2004). Four of the AAA+
domains can bind ATP (Figure 1A) (Gibbons et al., 1991;
Kon et al., 2004; Reck-Peterson and Vale, 2004; Takaha-
shi et al., 2004), with AAA1 being the principal site of hy-
drolysis (Gibbons et al., 1987) and AAA3 also contributing
an essential role in dynein function (Kon et al., 2005; Reck-
Peterson and Vale, 2004; Silvanovich et al., 2003). A 10–15 nm
antiparallel coiled-coil stalk emerges after AAA4, and
a globular microtubule binding domain is located at the
tip of the coiled-coil stalk (Figure 1A) (Gee et al., 1997;
Goodenough and Heuser, 1984; Koonce, 1997). NH2
terminal to the AAA domains is the ‘‘linker’’ domain that
has been suggested to interact with the AAA ring and
has been proposed to be involved in force generation
(Burgess et al., 2003; Kon et al., 2005). The NH2-terminal
region of the dynein heavy chain (the ‘‘tail’’ domain) is
involved in dimerization, binding to dynein associated
proteins, and interactions with cargo [reviewed in Vallee
et al. (2004)].

Studies of bead movement driven by cytoplasmic dy-
nein in vitro suggest that single dynein molecules are
processive, i.e., that single-motor molecules are capable
of taking multiple steps along their microtubule track with-
out detaching (King and Schroer, 2000; Mallik et al., 2004;
Wang et al., 1995). The mechanisms of processivity of Ki-
nesin-1 and myosin V have been well studied, and it has
been shown that nucleotide-driven conformational
changes of their mechanical elements power the hand-
over-hand stepping of their two identical motor domains

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 335

Figure 1. Puriﬁcation of Native Yeast
Dynein and Observation of Single-Mole-
cule Processivity
(A) Schematic of the native dynein heavy-chain
dimer. The NH2 terminus of the motor is labeled
with GFP (green asterisk), and the COOH termi-
nus of the motor is labeled with the HaloTag
and covalently bound to tetramethylrhodamine
(TMR, red asterisk).
(B) Puriﬁcation of native yeast dynein ex-
pressed from its endogenous promoter. Dy-
nein, NH2-terminally tagged with two copies
of the Protein A IgG binding domain, followed
by a TEV cleavage site, was bound to IgG
beads and then released from the beads with
TEV protease. Subsequently, dynein was
bound to microtubules in the absence of ATP,
microtubule-dynein complexes were collected
by centrifugation, and then dynein was re-
leased from microtubules by addition of 5 mM
ATP (see Supplemental Data for details). A
silver-stained gel shows the full-length dynein
heavy chain after the ﬁnal puriﬁcation step. Tu-
bulin is also present from the last afﬁnity step.
(C) Tagging native yeast dynein (the construct
described in [A] and [B]) does not affect its
function in nuclear segregation in vivo. For
monitoring nuclear segregation, the number
of binucleate mitotic cells was determined after growth at 16C for 16 hr. dyn1D is a yeast strain bearing a deletion in the dynein heavy-chain
gene. The mean and standard error of the mean are shown (n > 300).
(D) Histogram of velocities of single native dynein molecules moving along axonemal microtubules (ﬁt with a Gaussian function; black line). The mean
velocity is 85 ± 30 nm/s (SD); n = 334.
(E) Histogram of run lengths of single dynein molecules moving along axonemal microtubules. The run length is 1.9 ± 0.2 mm (mean ± standard error
[SE]; n = 334; Figure S3). See Movie S1 for images of native dynein moving along axonemes.

(Vale and Milligan, 2000; Yildiz and Selvin, 2005). In con-
trast, the mechanism of processivity of dynein is much
less well understood, and dynein’s distinct evolutionary
origin and structural features suggest that its mechanism
could differ considerably from other cytoskeletal motors.
Indeed, a single-headed axonemal dynein has been
shown to move processively (Sakakibara et al., 1999),
suggesting a mechanism other than one involving the co-
ordination of two motor domains. The requirement for one
or two motor domains, however, has not been explored for
dimeric dyneins, and current models for cytoplasmic dy-
nein motility evoke the actions of only a single dynein mo-
tor domain (Kon et al., 2005; Mallik et al., 2004).

Studies of kinesin and myosin processivity have been
aided by the ability to produce recombinant motors that
can be mutated and studied at a single-molecule level.
Comparable studies with cytoplasmic dynein have been
challenging because of its large size, and the production
of a recombinant dynein capable of processive motion
has not been achieved. Here, using S. cerevisiae to pro-
duce full-length dynein and a variety of truncated and
artiﬁcially dimerized dyneins, we show that two cytoplas-
mic dynein motor domains are needed for processivity,
but that the cargo binding region and dynein-associated
chains are not required for this process. We have also
been able to label dynein in speciﬁc locations with ﬂuores-

336 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

cent dyes or quantum dots and then track single mole-
cules with a precision of a few nanometers to reveal
dynein’s stepping behavior. In contrast to a previous re-
port of very large steps of cytoplasmic dynein under low
load (24–32 nm) (Mallik et al., 2004), we ﬁnd that dynein,
like Kinesin-1, moves primarily in 8 nm increments through
alternating movements of its two motor domains. How-
ever, unlike Kinesin-1, we ﬁnd that dynein steps are
variable in their size and direction. On the basis of these
ﬁndings, we provide a molecular model for how proces-
sive motion is achieved by cytoplasmic dynein.

RESULTS

Native Yeast Cytoplasmic Dynein Is a Processive
Motor
For dissection of the structural basis of dynein processiv-
ity, it is essential to develop a system in which one can
readily mutate or engineer the large dynein heavy-chain
gene and produce biochemical quantities of protein for
analysis. Previously, we have shown that S. cerevisiae af-
fords an attractive system for manipulating the nonessen-
tial genomic copy of DYN1 by homologous recombination
(Reck-Peterson and Vale, 2004). In this current study, we
puriﬁed full-length cytoplasmic dynein from S. cerevisiae
by using an NH2-terminal afﬁnity tag (Figures 1A and 1B;

Supplemental Data available online). We also inserted a
COOH- or NH2-terminal HaloTag, a 26 kDa protein tag
that enables covalent linkage of ﬂuorescent dyes or biotin.
These tags did not affect the in vivo function of yeast cyto-
plasmic dynein, as revealed by a nuclear segregation
assay (Figure 1C). Full-length puriﬁed yeast dynein
(Dyn1471 kDa; Figure 1B), which contains several associ-
ated subunits (Figure S1), bound to and released from mi-
crotubules and elicited in vitro microtubule gliding at 93 ±
27 nm/s (mean ± standard deviation [SD]; n = 302). This
velocity is an order of magnitude slower than that de-
scribed for cytoplasmic dyneins from other species, but ex-
ceeds the rates of dynein-dependent microtubule sliding in
living S. cerevisiae (20 nm/s) (Adames and Cooper, 2000).
Several previous studies examined the movement of ar-
tiﬁcial beads with different numbers of bound dynein mol-
ecules and concluded via statistical methods that a single
dynein can take multiple steps per encounter with its mi-
crotubule track (King and Schroer, 2000; Mallik et al.,
2004; Wang et al., 1995). To observe processive move-
ment of the dynein motor directly, we ﬂuorescently labeled
dynein and examined single molecules by using total inter-
nal reﬂection ﬂuorescence (TIRF) microscopy. Instead of
using GFP, which is suboptimal for single-molecule ﬂuo-
rescence studies because of its low quantum efﬁciency,
blinking behavior, and photobleaching rate, we covalently
linked tetramethylrhodamine (TMR) to a COOH-terminal
HaloTag. Single-molecule imaging was conﬁrmed by
observation of single- or two-step photobleaching of TMR-
labeled dynein (Figure S2A). Single TMR-labeled dynein
molecules attached to and moved along sea urchin axo-
nemes with a velocity of 85 ± 30 nm/s (mean ± SD; Fig-
ure 1D; Movie S1). A histogram of
the run lengths
(Figure 1E) revealed an exponential distribution with a de-
cay constant of 1.9 ± 0.2 mm (deﬁned as the mean run
length, Figure S3). We also observed processive move-
ment of dynein on porcine brain microtubules; the mean
run length (1.7 ± 0.2 mm) and velocity (90 ± 32 nm/s) were
comparable to those on axonemes (Figure S4; Movie S2).

Dimerization of the Dynein Heavy Chains Is Required
for Processivity
We next examined whether one or two motor domains are
required for processivity. To address this question, we
engineered a monomeric cytoplasmic dynein motor by
truncating NH2-terminal sequences that are responsible for
dimerization. This monomeric dynein (named Dyn1331 kDa
on the basis of its predicted molecular weight of 331
kDa) is truncated at the equivalent site to the 380 kDa trun-
cated dynein constructs from Dictyostelium and mamma-
lian cytoplasmic dynein (Hook et al., 2005; Koonce and
Samso, 1996; Nishiura et al., 2004), although the yeast
protein is shorter than these counterparts because it lacks
sequence at its COOH terminus. As shown previously for
the 380 kDa Dictyostelium dynein (Nishiura et al., 2004),
Dyn1331 kDa is a minus-end-directed motor in a multiple-
motor microtubule gliding assay (65 ± 12 nm/s; Figure 3E).
However, when individual Dyn1331 kDa molecules were

examined by TIRF microscopy, processive motion was
not observed (not shown).

The lack of processive motion of Dyn1331 kDa suggested
that a dimer of two motor domains may be needed for
processivity. To examine this possibility, we produced
a dynein whose monomer-dimer state could be controlled
by a small molecule. Dyn1331 kDa was fused at the NH2 ter-
minus (tail) to either the FRB or FKBP12 (referred to as
FKBP) domain, which can be crosslinked by the natural
product rapamycin to create a FRB-FKBP heterodimer
(Ho et al., 1996). In the absence of FKBP-Dyn1331 kDa,
TMR-labeled FRB-Dyn1331 kDa rarely displayed processive
movement (Figure 2A, Movie S3) either with or without
rapamycin. Photobleaching studies indeed conﬁrmed
that FRB-Dyn1331 kDa is monomeric under the conditions
of this assay (Figure S2B). After the addition of FKBP-
Dyn1331 kDa and rapamycin, TMR-labeled FRB-Dyn1331 kDa
exhibited robust processive movement (Figure 2B, Movie
S3). The frequency of processive movement of FKBP-
Dyn1331 kDa-rapamycin-FRB-Dyn1331 kDa was 300-fold
greater than FRB-Dyn1331 kDa alone. (The very rare move-
ments of FRB-Dyn1331 kDa [1 event per 15 mm axoneme
per 15 min of observation] could be attributable to a rare
dimer or aggregate in the population.) The velocity of
FKBP-rapamycin-FRB-Dyn1331 kDa (64 ± 32 nm/s) and
run length (1.2 ± 0.1 mm) were slightly lower than those of
full-length dynein. The slightly lower run length might be
due to the release of rapamycin [the dissociation constant
of the FKBP-rapamycin-FRB ternary complex to FKBP-
rapamycin and FRB is 12 nM (Banaszynski et al., 2005)],
which would be expected to terminate a run by dissociat-
ing the dynein dimer. These experiments showing rapamy-
cin-based control of dynein processivity indicate that
a dimer of two dynein motor domains is required for pro-
cessivity and that the NH2-terminal200 kDa of the dynein
heavy chain is not required for this activity.

A Minimal Dynein Motor that Displays
Processive Motion
We next sought to make a stable dynein homodimer that
exhibits processive motion and deﬁne a minimal motor
that displays processive motion. To accomplish this, we
placed glutathione S-transferase (GST), which forms
a constitutive homodimer, at the NH2 terminus (tail) of
Dyn1331 kDa (Figure 3A). TMR-labeled GST-Dyn1331 kDa
exhibited robust processive movement in the single-
molecule TIRF assay with a run length of 2.3 ± 0.3 mm
and a velocity of 102 ± 32 nm/s (Figures 3B and 3C; Movie
S4). These values are similar to those of full-length dynein
and indicate that a nonnative dimerization domain can
produce a fully functional motor.

To further deﬁne the minimal size of a dynein motor
that enables processive movement, we truncated an
additional 145 aa (GST-Dyn1314 kDa) and 171 aa (GST-
Dyn1311 kDa) from the NH2-terminal motor sequence of
GST-Dyn1331 kDa (Figures 3A and 3B; see Figure S6 for
a detailed sequence alignment). GST-Dyn1314 kDa was
processive in the single-molecule TIRF assay with a run

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 337

Figure 2. Artiﬁcial Dimerization of Dynein Monomers Induces Processive Movement
(A) TMR-labeled FRB-Dyn1331 kDa plus rapamycin did not move processively in the single-molecule TIRF assay. Kymographs were made by horizon-
tally stacking line scans along the axonemal axis. Some stationary dynein molecules were seen (vertical lines), but most molecules bound transiently,
and no moving molecules were observed (see diagonal lines in Figure 2B).
(B) Dimerization of TMR-labeled FRB-Dyn1331 kDa and FKBP12-Dyn1331 kDa by rapamycin produces processive runs in the single-molecule TIRF
assay. Diagonal lines in the kymograph represent dynein molecules that are moving along the axoneme over time (see also Movie S3). A histogram
of rapamycin-dimerized dynein run lengths shows a run length of 1.2 ± 0.1 mm (mean ± SE; n = 223, Figure S3).

length of 1.7 ± 0.2 mm and a velocity of 87 ± 39 nm/s
(Figure 3C). However, the removal of an additional 26
amino acids produced a motor (GST-Dyn1311 kDa) that
could bind to axonemes in the single-molecule TIRF assay,
but was neither processive (Figure 3C) nor produced
movement in a multiple-motor microtubule gliding assay
(Figure 3D). In contrast to GST-Dyn1331 kDa, which showed
robust microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity (kcat, 16.1 ±
0.3 ATP/dimer/s, Km MT, 0.39 ± 0.06 mM tubulin dimer;
Figure S5), GST-Dyn1311 kDa exhibited 4-fold lower basal
ATPase activity and did not display microtubule-stimu-
lated ATPase activity (Figure S5). We have also found
that the majority of GST-Dyn1311 kDa dynein molecules
exhibit 2-step photobleaching, indicating that its impaired
activity is not due to lack of dimerization (data not shown).
Additional truncations beyond GST-Dyn1311 kDa also did
not produce active motor proteins (data not shown).
Thus, we conclude that the 26 amino acids that separate
GST-Dyn1314 kDa and GST-Dyn1311 kDa are essential for
motility and microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity and
that the GST-Dyn1314 kDa construct represents a minimal
functional dynein motor.

To explore whether dynein needs to be dimerized via its
NH2 terminus or COOH terminus, we attached GST to the
COOH terminus of the AAA ring (Dyn1331 kDa-GST) rather
than the NH2 terminus (tail). Dyn1331 kDa-GST did not
move in the single-molecule TIRF assay, but, when teth-
ered to the glass via its NH2-terminal GFP tag, was capable
of moving microtubules in a multiple-motor gliding assay
and displayed microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity
(kcat 4.3 ± 0.3 ATP/dimer/s; Figures 3C and 3D;
Figure S5). In addition, we ﬁnd that Dyn1331 kDa-GST forms
a dimer by sucrose gradient centrifugation (Dyn1331 kDa-
GST and GST-Dyn1331 kDa have an S value of 15S, while
monomeric Dyn1331 kDa has an S value of 10S). Thus,
COOH-terminal GST dimerization does not permit

338 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

coordinated processive motion, but does not inactivate
the motor.

Recent structural experiments have shown that the
NH2-terminal linker domain of dynein undergoes ATP-de-
pendent movements that have been hypothesized to pro-
duce a dynein power stroke (Burgess et al., 2003; Kon
et al., 2005). To functionally test the idea that a movement
of the linker domain is involved in the power stroke, we at-
tached GFP to the COOH terminus (Dyn1331 kDa-GFP) of
a dynein monomer rather than the NH2 terminus (GFP-
Dyn1331 kDa). When attached to glass via the end of its mo-
tor domain, Dyn1331 kDa-GFP bound to, but did not move,
microtubules in a multiple-motor gliding assay under our
standard buffer conditions (containing 50 mM KAcetate),
but moved very slowly (3 ± 1 nm/s) at higher ionic strength
(300 mM KAcetate). In contrast, GFP-Dyn1331 kDa tethered
via its linker domain was capable of movement (Figure 3E).
Thus, when the anchor point for motility is moved from the
linker to the COOH terminus of the dynein ring, motility is
nearly abolished. These results suggest that the dynein
linker domain, and not the elongate microtubule binding
stalk or an element of the AAA ring, is the primary transmit-
ter of mechanical motion (see Discussion).

the light

We next wished to determine whether dynein-associ-
ated proteins are required for processive movement. A
number of associated proteins are essential for yeast
cytoplasmic dynein’s in vivo function, including the inter-
mediate chain (Pac11),
intermediate chain
(Dyn3), light chain (Dyn2), the dynactin complex (Nip100,
Jnm1, Arp1, Arp11, Cap1, and Cap2), and the lissence-
phaly 1/Lis1 (Pac1) and nudel (Ndl) proteins. Because
the truncated dynein dimer GST-Dyn1331 kDa is overex-
pressed behind the galactose promoter, any chains that
might copurify are unlikely to be present stoichiometri-
cally. Nevertheless, we puriﬁed GST-Dyn1331 kDa from
tagged yeast strains and performed immunoblots to

Figure 3. Deﬁning the Minimal Proces-
sive Dynein Motor
(A) Schematic showing dynein heavy-chain
truncations and tags. A HaloTag at the COOH
terminus allowed attachment of TMR for single-
molecule assays. The orange oval represents
GST, which was used to dimerize monomeric
constructs either at the NH2 or the COOH
terminus. GFP (green rectangle) was added to
the NH2 terminus of all proteins and was used
to anchor dynein molecules to glass with
a GFP antibody in microtubule gliding assays.
Here we functionally deﬁne the term ‘‘linker’’
as the 400 amino acids, located NH2-terminal
to the start of the AAA domain, that we have
found necessary for dynein motility. The scale
bar represents 500 aa.
(B) SYPRO-ruby (Molecular Probes)-stained
protein gel of the truncated dynein proteins.
The gel shows GST-Dyn1331
kDa, GST-
Dyn1314 kDa, and Dyn1331 kDa-GST after IgG
and microtubule afﬁnity-puriﬁcation steps,
and GST-Dyn1311 kDa is shown after the ﬁrst
afﬁnity-puriﬁcation step because this protein
releases poorly from microtubules in the
presence of ATP.
(C) The mean single-molecule run length ± SE
for each of the dynein constructs is shown.
GST-Dyn1311 kDa and Dyn1331 kDa-GST both
bound to microtubules in the single-molecule
assay, but no moving molecules were ob-
served.
(D) Mean single (light gray) and multiple motor
(dark gray) velocity ± SD for each of the dynein
constructs. GST-Dyn1311 kDa bound to micro-
tubules and axonemes, but showed no motility
in either assay. Dyn1331 kDa-GST bound, but
was not capable of moving on, axonemes in
the single-molecule assay.
(E) The tail domain is required for the dynein
power stroke. Monomeric Dyn1331 kDa was an-
chored to glass for microtubule gliding assays via GFP attached either to its tail (NH2 terminus; GFP-Dyn1331 kDa) or end of its motor domain (COOH
terminus; Dyn1331 kDa-GFP). GFP-Dyn1331 kDa moved microtubules along the glass (mean ± SD is shown), whereas Dyn1331 kDa-GFP could bind mi-
crotubules but not move them under our standard buffer conditions (including 50 mM KAcetate). Under higher ionic strength conditions (300 mM
KAcetate), very slow (3 ± 1 nm/s) movement of Dyn1331 kDa-GFP was observed.
(F) GST-Dyn1331 kDa puriﬁed from yeast strains lacking the light intermediate chain (Dyn3), the intermediate chain (Pac11), or the Lis 1 protein (Pac1)
shows a similar run length to a yeast strain that does not harbor these deletions (GST-Dyn1331 kDa). The bar graph shows the mean single-molecule run
length ± SE for each strain background (Figure S3). The single-molecule velocities for dynein puriﬁed from each of these yeast strains was also similar
to the control yeast strain (mean velocity ± SD = 103 ± 32, 108 ± 33, 98 ± 46, and 98 ± 32 nm/s for GST- Dyn1331 kDa, dyn3D, pac11D, and pac1D,
respectively). n values for the data in this ﬁgure are between 184 and 334.

probe for the presence of the dynein-associated subunits.
We found no evidence for copuriﬁcation of the p150glued
subunit (Nip100) of the dynactin complex with GST-
Dyn1331 kDa (Figure S1). The dynein light intermediate
chain and the dynein intermediate chain were present
after the ﬁrst step of puriﬁcation, but were not detectable
after the second step of puriﬁcation (microtubule afﬁnity),
whereas the Lis 1 protein was detectable after both puriﬁ-
cation steps (Figure S1). Because we are working at the
single-molecule level in our TIRF assays, it remained pos-
sible that we were observing movement of rare dynein
molecules with associated dynein light intermediate or in-
termediate chains that were present at levels below the

detection of immunoblot. Thus, to ask whether the Lis 1
protein [which recruits Nudel (Li et al., 2005)] or the dynein
light
intermediate or intermediate [which recruits the
dynactin complex and the dynein light chain (Karki and
Holzbaur, 1995; Lo et al., 2001)] chains are required for
processivity, we puriﬁed GST-Dyn1331 kDa from yeast
strains with gene deletions in these associated subunits.
GST-Dyn1331 kDa remained processive with a similar run
length and velocity when puriﬁed from yeast strains lack-
ing Lis 1 or the light intermediate or intermediate chains
(Figure 3F). Thus, we conclude that dynein processivity
does not require any of the known dynein-associated sub-
units in the yeast genome.

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 339

Stepping Behavior of Quantum-Dot-Labeled Dynein
To learn more about the mechanism of cytoplasmic dy-
nein processivity, we tracked individual ﬂuorescently la-
beled GST-Dyn1331 kDa molecules with high spatial preci-
sion to observe their stepping behavior (Yildiz and Selvin,
2005). In this method, light emitted from a single ﬂuores-
cent molecule is collected with a sensitive CCD camera,
and the point-spread function of the image is ﬁt with
a 2D Gaussian distribution; the center of the Gaussian dis-
tribution can be determined with a precision of a few nano-
meters and tracked over time. To collect as many photons
as possible for precise tracking and to minimize photo-
bleaching, we labeled GST-Dyn1331 kDa with a bright
quantum dot (Qdot), attaching it via a streptavidin-biotin
link to the HaloTag under conditions that prevent aggrega-
tion (see Supplemental Data).

We ﬁrst placed the Qdot at the NH2-terminal tail to ob-
serve the presumed center-of-mass movements of the
motor. To best observe stepping behavior, we decreased
the motor speed by reducing the ATP concentration to
4 mM. With the high photostability of the Qdot, GST-
Dyn1331 kDa movement could be tracked for several min-
utes, and step-wise movement was evident in the traces
(Figure 4A, Figure S7). The displacement ﬂuctuations of
the Qdot when dynein paused in between steps varied,
but in favorable cases was 2 nm. These ﬂuctuations
were comparable to that observed for Qdot-GST-
Dyn1331 kDa bound in rigor to axonemes (2.5 nm) and ex-
ceeded that of a Qdot ﬁxed onto a glass surface (1.7 nm;
reﬂecting the noise inherent in our measurements). Several
general
features of dynein movement were apparent
from high-precision spatial tracking. First, the majority of
dynein molecules showed clear step-wise movement,
and typically >50 steps can be discerned in the movement
of a single dynein. Second, although the motion was
primarily unidirectional, every dynein molecule analyzed
(n > 80) exhibited backward stepping, which is rarely
displayed by Kinesin-1 or myosin V under low load (Yildiz
et al., 2003, 2004). Usually, only one or two consecutive
backward steps were observed, although one record
showed a 70 nm backward run comprising eight succes-
sive steps (top trace in Figure S7). A third obvious feature
of the traces is a considerable variation in step size, with
small (8 nm) and large (12–24 nm) steps appearing in
the same records. It is unlikely that the larger steps are
due to successive quick steps taken by the motor, be-
cause the average dwell time (2 s) greatly exceeds the
temporal resolution of our measurements (70 ms).

To ensure objective and unbiased step-size analysis,
we applied a step-ﬁnding algorithm to our stepping traces
(Kerssemakers et al., 2006). This program assumes that
steps are hidden in normal-distributed noise, but makes
no assumptions of step size or duration. A histogram of
the step sizes of tail-labeled dynein revealed a major
peak at 8 nm, which is similar to the distance between
adjacent tubulin dimers in a microtubule protoﬁlament
(8.3 nm; Figure 5A). However, there was a trailing shoulder
of larger steps (Figure 5A). A population of backward steps

340 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

(8–16 nm) was also observed, which constituted 20% of
the total steps measured.

We next tracked the stepping behavior of a single dynein
motor domain by labeling the COOH terminus of GST-
Dyn1331 kDa with a Qdot, which places the label adjacent
to the AAA6 domain of the motor ring (termed head-labeled
dynein). In our labeling conditions, only one head per dimer
was labeled with a Qdot (see Supplemental Data). Labeling
dynein with a Qdot on its head domain did not affect its
function, as indicated by normal single-molecule velocity
at 1 mM ATP (87 ± 44 nm/s, mean ± SD, n = 129). Step-
wise displacement of head-labeled GST-Dyn1331 kDa
was obvious in virtually all records of dynein motility
(Figure 4B, Figure S8). Similar to the tail-labeled dynein,
a variety of step sizes as well as backward steps were ob-
served (Figure 4B, Figure S8). A heterodimer of Dyn1331 kDa
labeled with TMR on a single head domain (with the FRB-
rapamycin-FKBP dimerization system) moving on either
axonemes or microtubules showed similar stepping to
a dynein motor labeled with a Qdot (Figures S10A and
S10B), indicating that neither the Qdot nor axonemes
perturb the basic behavior of the motor.

The histogram of step sizes for a Qdot-labeled head
domain in GST-Dyn1331 kDa revealed a major peak at
16 nm with a broad shoulder of larger steps, as well as
a broad distribution of backward steps (13% of total; Fig-
ure 5B). A similar histogram of step sizes was observed for
head-labeled native dynein (Figure S9). Thus, the step size
of a single head domain in a dimer is approximately 2-fold
greater than the step size of the presumed center of mass.

Dwell-Time Analysis of the Dynein Stepping
The approximately 2-fold-greater step size exhibited by in-
dividual dynein heads compared with the presumed cen-
ter-of-mass step size can be explained by a model in which
one head remains bound to a tubulin subunit while the part-
ner head detaches, moves past its stationary partner head,
and then binds to a new tubulin binding site toward the mi-
crotubule minus end, as has been suggested for myosin V
and Kinesin-1 (Yildiz et al., 2003, 2004). In this model, the
center of mass moves during each ATPase cycle, whereas
an individual head moves only once per two ATPase cycles
(moving past a stationary forward head in one ATPase cy-
cle, but remaining stationary itself in the next cycle). Cor-
roborating evidence for this model came from the ﬁndings
that the dwell-time distribution for the center-of-mass
steps at low ATP concentrations could be ﬁt to a single ex-
ponential (consistent with a single ATP binding event driv-
ing a step), whereas the dwell-time distribution for head
movements were best ﬁt by a convolution of two exponen-
tials (consistent with two ATP binding events driving a step)
(Yildiz et al., 2003, 2004).

times of

The histogram of dwell

tail-labeled GST-
Dyn1331 kDa (derived from the automated step-detection
program) ﬁts very well to a single-exponential distribution
(Figure 5A). In contrast, a dwell-time histogram of the
single head-labeled dynein (GST-Dyn1331 kDa or native
Dyn1) was best ﬁt by a convolution of two exponentials

Figure 4. Stepping Behavior of Tail- or Head-Labeled GST-Dyn1331 kDa
(A) GST-Dyn1331 kDa labeled with a Qdot at its NH2 terminus (center of mass of the dimer) takes discrete steps along axonemal microtubule tracks. The
raw data are shown with black circles and lines connecting the data points, and steps detected by a step ﬁnding program (see Experimental
Procedures) are shown in red (step size values are noted in red). Data was acquired at 4 mM ATP every 70 ms. Traces from four different dynein
molecules are shown and more representative examples can be found in Figure S7.
(B) A single Qdot positioned at the COOH terminus of one motor domain in the GST- Dyn1331 kDa dimer shows larger steps than NH2-terminally labeled
GST-Dyn1331 kDa. Data were acquired at 10 mM ATP every 100 ms. Traces from four different dynein molecules are shown, and more representative
examples can be found in Figure S8.

(Figure 5B, Figure S9). Although alternative mechanisms
are possible (see Discussion; Figure S11), the distinct
dwell-time distributions of center-of-mass- and head-
labeled dyneins is best explained by an alternating front-
rear stepping pattern for the two motor domains in the
dynein dimer.

Dynein Can Step Laterally as well as Forward
Past work has shown that dynein-coated beads make more
lateral movements than kinesin-coated beads (Wang et al.,
1995). With single-molecule ﬂuorescence tracking, we
could now explore this behavior with high spatial precision
and without bead attachment. With head-labeled GST-

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 341

Figure 5. Histograms of Dynein Step Sizes and Dwell Times
(A) A histogram of tail-labeled Qdot-GST-Dyn1331 kDa step sizes reveals a major peak at 8 nm with a considerable tail of longer steps. Included in the
histogram are 1342 steps from 27 moving dynein molecules. Backward steps make up 20% of the total. A histogram of dwell times between steps is ﬁt
with a single exponential function, and the decay constant reveals a stepping rate (k) of 0.13 ± 0.01 per second per mM ATP.
(B) A histogram of head-labeled GST-Dyn1331 kDa-Qdot step sizes reveals a major peak at 16–18 nm with a considerable tail of longer steps. Included in
the histogram are 1690 steps from 29 moving dynein molecules. Backward steps make up 13% of the total steps. The dwell-time histogram is ﬁt with
a convolution of two exponential functions with equal decay constants (the ﬁt indicates a dynein stepping rate (k) of 0.14 ± 0.01 per second per mM ATP).

Dyn1331 kDa-Qdot, we observed clear ‘‘jumps’’ perpendicu-
lar to the microtubule axis of dynein, which most likely
represent a displacement to a neighboring protoﬁlament
(Figures 6C and 6D). One concern might be that such off-
axis displacements are a result of the relatively large
Qdot. However, kinesin labeled with a Qdot did not show
substantial off-axis displacement (Figure S10C), and GST-
Dyn1331 kDa labeled with TMR on a single-motor domain
also showed off-axis stepping similar to Qdot-labeled
dynein (Figure S10A). Qdot-labeled dynein moving on
microtubules also displayed off-axis steps, indicating that
such movements are not limited to dynein moving on
axonemes (Figure S10B). Careful analysis of the off-axis
steps of GST-Dyn1331 kDa-Qdot revealed that the off-axis
steps usually occurred simultaneously with an on-axis step
(Figures 6C and 6D). This result indicates that as the dynein
motor domain takes a forward step, it has the reach or ﬂex-
ibility to occasionally land on an adjacent protoﬁlament, or,
in the case of an axoneme, possibly even a neighboring

342 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

microtubule. However, off-axis stepping was less com-
mon than on-axis stepping. Of 1690 forward steps scored
from 29 dynein molecules (all molecules showing some
off-axis stepping), 298 off-axis steps were observed (rang-
ing in size from 4–40 nm), representing 18% of the steps.
In conclusion, unlike Kinesin-1, we ﬁnd that cytoplasmic
dynein has the capability to reach laterally to an adjacent
protoﬁlament as it takes a forward step.

DISCUSSION

The combination of single-molecule assays and protein
engineering have contributed signiﬁcantly to our under-
standing of kinesin and myosin motility. Dynein’s large
size has hindered comparable efforts, although pioneering
studies have led to the production of a functional dynein
motor domain in Dicytostelium (Nishiura et al., 2004) and
insect cells (Hook et al., 2005). Here, we have used S. cer-
evisiae to produce the ﬁrst functional recombinant dimeric

of dynein directly. The combination of these approaches
has allowed us to dissect the structural basis of dynein
processivity and to develop strategies for linking ﬂuoro-
phores to speciﬁc sites on dynein to enable nanometer-
precision stepping analysis of cytoplasmic dynein in the
absence of load. The results derived from these struc-
ture-function and single-molecule ﬂuorescence motility
studies allow us to propose the ﬁrst model for how di-
meric, processive dynein moves along its microtubule
track.

Deﬁning a Minimal Motor Domain for Movement
and Processivity
Previous work has established that a monomeric 380 kDa
Dictyostelium (331 kDa for S. cerevisiae) dynein construct
is a functional motor in a multiple-motor motility assay
(Nishiura et al., 2004). Our work has further deﬁned the
minimal motor domain of dynein. Because S. cerevisiae
dynein lacks the COOH-terminal 285 aa (32 kDa) found
in Dictyostelium and other dyneins, this region does not
appear to be essential
for movement. Moreover, we
show that NH2-terminal truncation to aa 1390 (a 314 kDa
motor, equivalent to 365 kDa for the Dictyostelium dynein)
does not substantially perturb motility. However, remov-
ing an additional 26 amino acids (Dyn1311 kDa) causes
a complete loss of motility, thus establishing Dyn1314 kDa
as reasonably close to the minimal size motor for dynein
motility. Dyn1314 kDa lacks a number of highly conserved
sequence motifs (Figure S6), which must serve some
role but do not appear to be essential for movement. Inter-
estingly, the NH2 terminus of Dyn1314 kDa is still 394 aa (46
kDa) from the beginning of the ﬁrst AAA domain. A likely
interpretation is that this 400 aa sequence forms the
‘‘linker’’ domain, which has been proposed to wrap
around the AAA ring and undergo an ATP-driven power
stroke (Burgess et al., 2003; Kon et al., 2005). Truncation
of the 26 aa that are missing in Dyn1311 kDa may interfere
with the ability of the linker domain to either interact with
the AAA ring or undergo a conformational change. Also
consistent with the linker/AAA ring powering a dynein
power stroke (Burgess et al., 2003), we show that dynein
anchored to the glass NH2-terminal to the linker enables
microtubule gliding, whereas anchoring the same con-
struct to the glass via the COOH terminus of the AAA
ring drastically impairs dynein’s ability to transmit move-
ment to the microtubule.

This work also has established that two motor domains
are required for cytoplasmic dynein processivity. Unlike
inner-arm axonemal dynein bound to beads, which was
reported to show processive movement as a monomer
(Sakakibara et al., 1999), we ﬁnd that cytoplasmic dynein
monomers are incapable of processive movement. How-
ever, dimerization of monomeric constructs can restore
processivity, and the minimal size construct that enables
monomer-based movement (Dyn1314 kDa) also is sufﬁcient
for processive motion when artiﬁcially dimerized. Interest-
ingly, the native dynein dimerization domain is not re-
quired for processivity and can be substituted by two

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 343

Figure 6. Dynein Can Step to Neighboring Protoﬁlaments
(A) Diagram of an axoneme and the direction of on-axis (red arrow) and
off-axis (blue arrow) movement.
(B–D) Three examples of on-axis (parallel to the microtubule long axis)
and off-axis (perpendicular to the microtubule long axis) stepping by
head-labeled GST-Dyn1331 kDa-Qdot. (B) shows an example of no
off-axis stepping, (C) shows the most typical trace of a few off-axis
steps, and (D) shows a rare trace of many large off-axis displacements.
On-axis stepping position is represented by the black circles (raw
data), and the red line shows a ﬁt with the step-ﬁnding program,
whereas off-axis stepping position is represented by blue circles
(raw data) and lines. Dashed orange lines illustrate that on- and off-
axis steps occur simultaneously. The panels on the right depict off-axis
(x axis) versus on-axis (y axis) movements. The direction of movement
is toward the top of the page. Each step is represented by a black
circle, and the steps are connected with a black line. See Figure S10
for additional traces and discussion of off-axis displacement.

dynein (both full-length as well as truncated, artiﬁcially di-
merized motors) and have developed the ﬁrst single-mol-
ecule ﬂuorescence assays to observe processive motion

structurally distinct mechanisms of dimerization, either
GST homodimerization or chemically induced heterodi-
merization using FKBP-rapamycin-FRB, both of which en-
able processive motion that is very similar to that gener-
ated by native dynein. In contrast, normal processivity
by Kinesin-1 requires the precise positioning of a coiled
coil immediately after its mechanical element (the neck
linker); substitution of this coiled coil with FKBP-rapamy-
cin-FRB does not enable Kinesin-1 to move processively
(M. Tomishige and R.D.V., unpublished data). We also
show that processivity requires placement of the dimer-
ization domain NH2-terminal to the linker domain and
not COOH terminal to the AAA ring. This result indicates
that the linker domains must be connected to enable
head-head communication for processive motion.

thereby simplifying investigations of

We show that dynein-associated proteins (dynein light,
light intermediate, and intermediate chains and Lis 1, nu-
del, and dynactin) are not required for processive move-
ment,
the basic
mechanism of dynein processivity. However, it is possible
that the associated proteins could enhance processivity,
as has been reported for brain dynein in the presence of
the dynactin complex in vitro (King and Schroer, 2000).

Stepping Behavior of Cytoplasmic Dynein
Mallik et al. (2004) have reported that single mammalian
dynein molecules primarily take large steps (24–32 nm)
at low load, but advance in 8 nm steps when multiple dy-
neins interact with a microtubule and contribute to move-
ment (Mallik et al., 2005). Another study has reported an
8 nm step size of cytoplasmic dynein carrying peroxi-
somes in living cells (Kural et al., 2005). However, the num-
bers of dynein molecules involved in this movement could
not be established or controlled in this in vivo study, and it
was difﬁcult to establish whether plus-end-directed steps
were caused by a kinesin stepping forward or a dynein
stepping backward. While this paper was under review,
Toba et al. (2006) reported a regular 8 nm step size of
mammalian cytoplasmic dynein carrying beads in an opti-
cal trap or with an attached Qdot. Thus, cytoplasmic dy-
nein stepping behavior remains controversial.

Here, using covalently attached Qdots at deﬁned loca-
tions in the molecule, we have been able to collect more
stepping data than in previous studies. The majority of dy-
nein molecules show clear stepping behavior, and within
an individual run, many steps (>50) can be observed en-
abling robust statistical analysis (n > 3500 steps for the dy-
nein’s reported in Figures 4 and 5 and Figures S7, S8, and
S9). The results of our analysis differ from those of Mallik
et al. (2004) and Toba et al. (2006) as we observe primarily
8 nm steps, as well as a broad shoulder of larger step
sizes. Moreover, Toba et al. randomly labeled dynein
with Qdots with a nonspeciﬁc crosslinker, in which case
head labeling should be similar to tail labeling on the basis
of their relative masses. Therefore, our results with site-
speciﬁc labeling of dynein would predict a much greater
frequency of 16 nm and >16 nm steps than was reported
by Toba et al. Further work will be required to resolve

344 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

these differences in reported dynein stepping behavior,
with particular attention paid to possible species variation
in dynein, protein preparation, and assay/labeling condi-
tions.

Analysis of the dwell times between steps can provide
information on the number of ATPs hydrolyzed per step.
Our dwell-time histogram for the tail-labeled dynein at
low ATP concentrations is ﬁt by a single exponential,
which suggests that steps are triggered by the binding
of a single ATP molecule. A similar ﬁnding was reported
for brain cytoplasmic dynein stepping in an optical trap
(Mallik et al., 2004; Toba et al., 2006). Our measured
ATPase rates (kcat of 16 Pi/s/dimer) and stepping mea-
surements (8 nm steps with a 0.8 probability of forward
stepping) also are consistent with a single ATP hydrolysis
per step producing our measured velocities of movement
(100 nm/s) assuming all motors in our preparation are
active. These results are intriguing, since dynein contains
four ATP binding sites and mutagenesis studies have
shown that ATP binding and hydrolysis at two sites
(AAA1 and AAA3) are essential for dynein function in vivo
(Reck-Peterson and Vale, 2004; Silvanovich et al., 2003)
and in vitro (Kon et al., 2005). It is still unclear how the sin-
gle-exponential distribution of dwell times can be recon-
ciled with the mutagenesis studies, although one possible
explanation is that more than one ATP binds per step but
with considerably different association rates.

Our dynein stepping data also reveal interesting similar-
ities and differences with other cytoskeletal motors. Like
kinesin, dynein can take 8 nm steps along a microtubule
track. However, kinesin motion at low load is very regular,
exhibiting little variation in step size and very few back-
ward steps. In contrast, cytoplasmic dynein exhibits a
broad step-size distribution and frequently makes back-
ward and sideways steps. This behavior is most reminis-
cent of myosin VI, which also shows a broad step-size dis-
tribution as well as occasional backward steps at low load
[e.g., (Rock et al., 2005)]. The variation in myosin VI step
sizes is thought to be due to ﬂexibility in its ‘‘neck’’ domain,
which allows Brownian excursions to several potential ac-
tin binding sites (Rock et al., 2005). A similar model may
explain the variation in dynein step sizes, as discussed
below.

Models for Cytoplasmic Dynein Motility
By selectively placing ﬂuorescent labels in the dynein mol-
ecule, we have discovered that the dynein tail (center of
mass of the dimer) takes steps that are 2 fold smaller
than the head. In addition, the dwell-time distribution of
tail-labeled dynein is ﬁt by a single exponential, whereas
the dwell-time distribution of head-labeled dynein is best
ﬁt by a convolution of two exponentials. Taken together,
these data are consistent with two possible models for dy-
nein stepping (Figure 7, Figure S11). In the ﬁrst model, the
two dynein heads alternate taking 16 nm steps, whereas
the centroid position of the molecule moves by 8 nm for
each step (Figure 7). We term this motion ‘‘alternating
shufﬂing’’ rather than ‘‘hand-over-hand’’ movement, since

Figure 7. Model for Processive Move-
ment of Dimeric Cytoplasmic Dynein
A stepping model for cytoplasmic dynein that
takes into account the step-size and dwell-
time data for head- and tail-labeled dynein.
The head (COOH terminus)- labeled dynein
(H) is represented by the red tag, and the cen-
ter-of-mass-labeled dynein (T) is represented
by the yellow tags (the AAA ring is shown sche-
matically from this top view as a rectangle with
rounded edges; the AAA rings and tubulin
dimers are shown approximately to scale).
(A) In this Alternating Shufﬂe model, the two
dynein motor domains alternate between for-
ward and rear positions; the tail-labeled dynein
takes predominantly successive 8 nm steps
(the distance between tubulin dimers). In con-
trast, a single dynein motor domain takes
a 16 nm step and then remains stationary (a
0 nm step) as its partner ring advances. Struc-
tural considerations suggest that the rings may
align parallel to one another and partially over-
lap (see Discussion). Although dynein is shown
here moving along a single protoﬁlament, we
have shown that dynein can also move on
neighboring protoﬁlaments (see Figure 6).
(B–D) Another view of the Alternating Shufﬂe
model illustrating how dynein could take 8 nm
as well as 16 nm steps from either a greater
separation of the motor rings (C) or angular
movements of the microtubule binding stalks
(D)
(a combination of these mechanisms is
also possible). In (B)–(D), possible tubulin bind-
ing sites (both forward and rearward) are indi-
cated by the blue-shaded tubulin subunits,
with the darkest blue representing the most fre-
quently observed step size of 8 nm.

the large dimensions of the AAA ring make it unlikely that
the heads are completely separated into nonoverlapping
forward and rear positions as is true of Kinesin-1 and my-
osin V (Figure 7; see discussion below). In the second
model (‘‘asymmetric inchworm’’) (Hua et al., 2002), a single
head always takes the leading position, extending forward
to a new binding site while the rear head remains station-
ary, and then the rear head catches up in the next cycle
(Figure S11). We disfavor the asymmetric inchworm model
(Figure 7C, Figure S11B), however, because it requires
a very large separation of the dynein heads in order for
the tail to take >8 nm steps. For example, to achieve
a 24 nm center-of-mass step (seen in our traces) with an
asymmetric inchworm mechanism, the centers of the
two dynein heads would have to separate by 48 nm,
thus requiring the linkers to extend by 36 nm between
the rings and the central dimerization domain (Fig-
ure S11B). Although separation of the two dynein heads
may be possible (discussed below), it seems unlikely
that the linker regions in GST-Dyn1331 kDa could accom-
modate such a large head-head separation (Burgess
et al., 2003; Samso and Koonce, 2004). However, a ﬁnal
proof of the alternating shufﬂing mechanism will require la-
beling of each head with different ﬂuorophores, as has
been done for Myosin V (Churchman et al., 2005; War-

shaw et al., 2005). We have attempted this experiment
with dynein, but have thus far not been able to label a sin-
gle molecule with two different Qdots (see Supplemental
Data).

A stepping model also must take into account the di-
mensions of the dynein molecule and the step sizes. The
dimensions of the dynein ring (13–15 nm in diameter)
and stalk (10–15 nm in length) are large compared to the
spacing of tubulin subunits (8.3 nm)
(Burgess et al.,
2003; Samso and Koonce, 2004). Whereas dimeric kinesin
needs to extend via its neck linkers to span the distance
between tubulin subunits, the large dynein dimer may
need to adopt a compact form to constrain itself to taking
8 nm steps. A compact dynein dimer could be achieved by
overlapping the dynein rings, which are only 4 nm in width
(Burgess et al., 2003; Samso and Koonce, 2004), parallel
to the microtubule axis (Figure 7B). Consistent with this
idea, electron microscopy of axonemal dyneins suggests
that the motor rings may indeed stack (Lupetti et al., 2005;
Nicastro et al., 2005), analogous to other AAA+ proteins
[e.g., (Fletcher et al., 2003)]. A compact dynein dimer is
further supported by the fact that the artiﬁcial dimer-
ization domains used in this study are likely to be located
within a few nanometers of the ring (Kon et al., 2004). The
close proximity of the rings also raises the possibility

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 345

that ring-ring communication could occur, as observed
for other AAA proteins (Cashikar et al., 2002; DeLaBarre
and Brunger, 2003).

However, an ‘‘extended’’ conformation of the dynein
dimer also is likely to exist, as evidenced by the relatively
common occurrence of >8 nm and off-axis steps. Two
mechanisms (which are not mutually exclusive) might al-
low dynein to extend to more distant subunits and take
larger steps. First, the connection between the AAA ring
and the dimerization domain might be ﬂexible, allowing
the rings to separate and the lead head to reach more dis-
tant tubulin subunits (Figure 7C). Second, angular motions
of the elongate (10–15 nm) stalk [observed in EM studies
(Burgess et al., 2003; Samso and Koonce, 2004)] could
enable the microtubule binding domain to reach forward
or laterally (Figure 7D). Stalk movements, however, do
not preserve a precise 2:1 coupling of head:tail step sizes,
whereas ring-ring separations do (Figure 7C versus
Figure 7D). Thus, simultaneous dual-color imaging of ﬂuo-
rophores on the head and tail could be used to distinguish
between these models.

Still lacking in our model is a structural understanding of
how ATP-driven protein conformational changes cause
one dynein head to advance past its partner. In Kinesin-
1 and myosin V, conformational changes in the lead
head-neck linker and lever arm domains, respectively,
pull the rear head forward (Vale and Milligan, 2000). The
dynein linker domain may serve a similar role in dynein
motility. The single-molecule tools described here could
be further developed to obtain information on the confor-
mations of the linker domains in the leading and trailing
heads in order to derive a more detailed structural model
for dynein processivity.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Protein Constructs
The yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table S1. Nuclear seg-
regation assays were performed as described (Reck-Peterson and
Vale, 2004). All tagging and truncation of the dynein heavy chain was
performed by homologous recombination into the genomic copy of
DYN1 in haploid yeast cells. For puriﬁcation and analysis, a ZZ tag
(two copies of the IgG binding domain of protein A), a TEV protease
cleavage site, a short linker sequence (DYDIPTTENLYFQG) that en-
hances the efﬁciency of TEV protease cleavage, GFP (used to tether
dynein to glass in microtubule gliding assays), and a 3XHA tag (used
to detect dynein by immunoblot) were added to the 50 end of most
dynein constructs (VY206 contained GFP at its 30 end, and VY207
and VY209 did not contain GFP). All truncated dynein proteins were
expressed behind the galactose promoter, which was placed just
upstream of the puriﬁcation tag, whereas full-length dynein was
expressed behind its endogenous promoter. Deletion (with NAT or
URA) or tagging (with 3X Flag or 13X Myc) of the dynein-associated
chains (DYN3, PAC11, PAC1, and NIP100) was performed with
standard techniques (Longtine et al., 1998). Further details of construct
design, protein puriﬁcation, and ﬂuorescent labeling are described in
the Supplemental Data.

gliding assays reported for kinesin motors (Case et al., 1997). Details
are described in the Supplemental Data.

For single-molecule TIRF microscopy, Cy5-labeled sea urchin axo-
nemes were added directly to the coverslip of the motility chamber (to
which they adhere tightly), and the chamber was washed to remove
free dynein. Dynein motors were then added to the motility chamber,
where they adhered in a rigor state to axonemes. After a 2 min incu-
bation, the chamber was washed again and motility buffer [30 mM
HEPES (pH 7.2), 50 mM KAcetate, 2 mM MgAcetate, 1 mM EGTA,
10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM Mg-ATP, + an oxygen scavenger sys-
tem (Yildiz et al., 2003)] was added. Single dynein molecules moving
along Cy5-labeled axonemes were visualized with a custom-built total
internal reﬂection microscope using objective-style TIRF and an Argon
laser with 514 nm illumination at 3 mW. Images were acquired (every
2 s for 8 min) with a cooled, intensiﬁed CCD camera (Mega10-S30Z,
Stanford Photonics). See Supplemental Data for details on run length
and velocity analysis. Every construct was tested for processivity
from at least two independent protein preparations.

High spatial-precision measurements of ﬂuorescently labeled
dynein were performed with an objective-type TIRF microscope as
described previously (FIONA method) (Yildiz et al., 2003). HaloTagged
yeast dynein was ﬁrst labeled with TMR (Promega) or dPEG-biotin
(Promega). Biotin-labeled dynein molecules were then labeled with
655 Qdot Streptavidin (Quantum dots Inc) either on the NH2 or the
COOH terminus while bound in rigor to axonemes, as described
above, to prevent possible aggregation on Qdots. The sample was ex-
cited by a 488 nm Argon Ion laser line (for Qdots) or a 532 nm NdYAG
laser (for TMR) and imaged through a 1.45 N.A. oil immersion objective
(Zeiss). The signal was detected with a Cascade 512B (Photometrics),
back-thinned electron multiplier CCD camera. Stepping experiments
were performed in motility buffer lacking KAcetate (which increases
the run length) and supplemented with an ATP regenerating system
(1% pyruvate kinase and 10 mM phosphenolpyruvate). A 2D Gauss-
ian-ﬁt procedure and data analysis were performed as described pre-
viously (Yildiz et al., 2003). Steps were determined by using a step-
ﬁnding program developed by Kerssemakers et al. (2006). We then
visually screened the data and included steps in the histogram that
could be visually separated and contained no more than one data point
between two dwell plateaus (two or more data points between obvious
plateaus could represent either noise or steps that were too fast to be
temporally resolved at our image acquisition rate).

Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data include four movies, Supplemental Experimental
Procedures, one table, and eleven ﬁgures and are available with this
article online at: http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/126/2/335/
DC1/.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Nicole Mahoney for early contributions, Nico
Stuurman and Adam Douglass for advice on microscopy and image
analysis, members of the Vale lab and Andres Leschziner for stimulat-
ing discussions, and Roberto Albanese for media preparation. We
thank Jacob Kerssemakers and Marileen Dogterom for generously pro-
viding their step-ﬁnding program ahead of publication. This work has
been supported by the National Institutes of Health (P01-AR42895
[R.D.V.] and F32-GM67403-02 [S.R.-P.]),
the Jane Cofﬁn Childs
Foundation (A.G. and A.P.C.), the German Research Foundation
(GE 1609/1 [A.G.]), the Agouron Institute (A.P.C.), and the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute.

Motility Assays
Microtubule gliding assays were performed by attaching dynein via its
GFP tag to glass surfaces coated with GFP antibodies, analogous to

Received: March 5, 2006
Revised: May 4, 2006
Accepted: May 17, 2006
Published: July 27, 2006

346 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

REFERENCES

Adames, N.R., and Cooper, J.A. (2000). Microtubule interactions with
the cell cortex causing nuclear movements in Saccharomyces cerevi-
siae. J. Cell Biol. 149, 863–874.

Banaszynski, L.A., Liu, C.W., and Wandless, T.J. (2005). Characteriza-
tion of the FKBP.rapamycin.FRB ternary complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
127, 4715–4721.

Burgess, S.A., Walker, M.L., Sakakibara, H., Knight, P.J., and Oiwa, K.
(2003). Dynein structure and power stroke. Nature 421, 715–718.

Case, R.B., Pierce, D.W., Hom-Booher, N., Hart, C.L., and Vale, R.D.
(1997). The directional preference of kinesin motors is speciﬁed by
an element outside of the motor catalytic domain. Cell 90, 959–966.

Cashikar, A.G., Schirmer, E.C., Hattendorf, D.A., Glover, J.R., Ramak-
rishnan, M.S., Ware, D.M., and Lindquist, S.L. (2002). Deﬁning a path-
way of communication from the C-terminal peptide binding domain to
the N-terminal ATPase domain in a AAA protein. Mol. Cell 9, 751–760.

Churchman, L.S., Okten, Z., Rock, R.S., Dawson, J.F., and Spudich,
J.A. (2005). Single molecule high-resolution colocalization of Cy3
and Cy5 attached to macromolecules measures intramolecular dis-
tances through time. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 1419–1423.

DeLaBarre, B., and Brunger, A.T. (2003). Complete structure of p97/
valosin-containing protein reveals communication between nucleotide
domains. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 856–863.

Fletcher, R.J., Bishop, B.E., Leon, R.P., Sclafani, R.A., Ogata, C.M.,
and Chen, X.S. (2003). The structure and function of MCM from
archaeal M. Thermoautotrophicum. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 160–167.

Gee, M.A., Heuser, J.E., and Vallee, R.B. (1997). An extended microtu-
bule-binding structure within the dynein motor domain. Nature 390,
636–639.

Gerdes, J.M., and Katsanis, N. (2005). Microtubule transport defects in
neurological and ciliary disease. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 62, 1556–1570.

Gibbons, I.R., Gibbons, B.H., Mocz, G., and Asai, D.J. (1991). Multiple
nucleotide-binding sites in the sequence of dynein beta heavy chain.
Nature 352, 640–643.

Gibbons, I.R., Lee-Eiford, A., Mocz, G., Phillipson, C.A., Tang, W.J.,
and Gibbons, B.H. (1987). Photosensitized cleavage of dynein heavy
chains. Cleavage at the ‘‘V1 site’’ by irradiation at 365 nm in the pres-
ence of ATP and vanadate. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 2780–2786.

Goodenough, U., and Heuser, J. (1984). Structural comparison of
puriﬁed dynein proteins with in situ dynein arms. J. Mol. Biol. 180,
1083–1118.

Ho, S.N., Biggar, S.R., Spencer, D.M., Schreiber, S.L., and Crabtree,
G.R. (1996). Dimeric ligands deﬁne a role for transcriptional activation
domains in reinitiation. Nature 382, 822–826.

Hook, P., Mikami, A., Shafer, B., Chait, B.T., Rosenfeld, S.S., and
Vallee, R.B. (2005). Long range allosteric control of cytoplasmic dynein
ATPase activity by the stalk and C-terminal domains. J. Biol. Chem.
280, 33045–33054.

Hua, W., Chung, J., and Gelles, J. (2002). Distinguishing inchworm and
hand-over-hand processive kinesin movement by neck rotation mea-
surements. Science 295, 844–848.

Karki, S., and Holzbaur, E.L. (1995). Afﬁnity chromatography demon-
strates a direct binding between cytoplasmic dynein and the dynactin
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 28806–28811.

Kerssemakers, J.W.J., Munteanu, E.L., Laan, L., Noetzel, T.L., Janson,
M.E., and Dogterom, M. (2006). Assembly dynamics of microtubules
at molecular resolution. Nature, in press. Published online June 25,
2006. 10.1038/nature04928.

Kon, T., Mogami, T., Ohkura, R., Nishiura, M., and Sutoh, K. (2005).
ATP hydrolysis cycle-dependent tail motions in cytoplasmic dynein.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 12, 513–519.

Kon, T., Nishiura, M., Ohkura, R., Toyoshima, Y.Y., and Sutoh, K.
(2004). Distinct functions of nucleotide-binding/hydrolysis sites in the
four AAA modules of cytoplasmic dynein. Biochemistry 43, 11266–
11274.

Koonce, M.P. (1997). Identiﬁcation of a microtubule-binding domain
in a cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 19714–
19718.

Koonce, M.P., and Samso, M. (1996). Overexpression of cytoplasmic
dynein’s globular head causes a collapse of the interphase microtu-
bule network in Dictyostelium. Mol. Biol. Cell 7, 935–948.

Kural, C., Kim, H., Syed, S., Goshima, G., Gelfand, V.I., and Selvin, P.R.
(2005). Kinesin and dynein move a peroxisome in vivo: A tug-of-war or
coordinated movement? Science 308, 1469–1472.

Li, J., Lee, W.L., and Cooper, J.A. (2005). NudEL targets dynein to
microtubule ends through LIS1. Nat. Cell Biol. 7, 686–690.

Lo, K.W., Naisbitt, S., Fan, J.S., Sheng, M., and Zhang, M. (2001). The
8-kDa dynein light chain binds to its targets via a conserved (K/R)XTQT
motif. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 14059–14066.

Longtine, M.S., McKenzie, A., 3rd, Demarini, D.J., Shah, N.G., Wach,
A., Brachat, A., Philippsen, P., and Pringle, J.R. (1998). Additional
modules for versatile and economical PCR-based gene deletion and
modiﬁcation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 14, 953–961.

Lupetti, P., Lanzavecchia, S., Mercati, D., Cantele, F., Dallai, R., and
Mencarelli, C. (2005). Three-dimensional reconstruction of axonemal
outer dynein arms in situ by electron tomography. Cell Motil. Cytoskel-
eton 62, 69–83.

Mallik, R., Carter, B.C., Lex, S.A., King, S.J., and Gross, S.P. (2004).
Cytoplasmic dynein functions as a gear in response to load. Nature
427, 649–652.

Mallik, R., Petrov, D., Lex, S.A., King, S.J., and Gross, S.P. (2005).
Building complexity: An in vitro study of cytoplasmic dynein with
in vivo implications. Curr. Biol. 15, 2075–2085.

Neuwald, A.F., Aravind, L., Spouge, J.L., and Koonin, E.V. (1999).
AAA+: A class of chaperone-like ATPases associated with the assem-
bly, operation, and disassembly of protein complexes. Genome Res. 9,
27–43.

Nicastro, D., McIntosh, J.R., and Baumeister, W. (2005). 3D structure
of eukaryotic ﬂagella in a quiescent state revealed by cryo-electron
tomography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15889–15894.

Nishiura, M., Kon, T., Shiroguchi, K., Ohkura, R., Shima, T., Toyosh-
ima, Y.Y., and Sutoh, K. (2004). A single-headed recombinant frag-
ment of Dictyostelium cytoplasmic dynein can drive the robust sliding
of microtubules. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 22799–22802.

Reck-Peterson, S.L., and Vale, R.D. (2004). Molecular dissection of
the roles of nucleotide binding and hydrolysis in dynein’s AAA domains
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 1491–
1495.

Rock, R.S., Ramamurthy, B., Dunn, A.R., Beccaﬁco, S., Rami, B.R.,
Morris, C., Spink, B.J., Franzini-Armstrong, C., Spudich, J.A., and
Sweeney, H.L. (2005). A ﬂexible domain is essential for the large
step size and processivity of myosin VI. Mol. Cell 17, 603–609.

Sakakibara, H., Kojima, H., Sakai, Y., Katayama, E., and Oiwa, K.
(1999). Inner-arm dynein c of Chlamydomonas ﬂagella is a single-
headed processive motor. Nature 400, 586–590.

Samso, M., and Koonce, M.P. (2004). 25 Angstrom resolution structure
of a cytoplasmic dynein motor reveals a seven-member planar ring.
J. Mol. Biol. 340, 1059–1072.

King, S.J., and Schroer, T.A. (2000). Dynactin increases the processiv-
ity of the cytoplasmic dynein motor. Nat. Cell Biol. 2, 20–24.

Silvanovich, A., Li, M.G., Serr, M., Mische, S., and Hays, T.S. (2003).
The third P-loop domain in cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain is essential

Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc. 347

for dynein motor function and ATP-sensitive microtubule binding. Mol.
Biol. Cell 14, 1355–1365.

Takahashi, Y., Edamatsu, M., and Toyoshima, Y.Y. (2004). Multiple
ATP-hydrolyzing sites that potentially function in cytoplasmic dynein.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 12865–12869.

Toba, S., Watanabe, T.M., Yamaguchi-Okimoto, L., Toyoshima, Y.Y.,
Higuchi, H., Watanabe, Y., Hayashi, M., Yagi, T., Kamiya, R., Hachiya,
N.S., et al. (2006). Overlapping hand-over-hand mechanism of single
molecular motility of cytoplasmic dynein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103, 5741–5745.

Vale, R.D., and Milligan, R.A. (2000). The way things move: Looking
under the hood of molecular motor proteins. Science 288, 88–95.

Vallee, R.B., Williams, J.C., Varma, D., and Barnhart, L.E. (2004).
Dynein: An ancient motor protein involved in multiple modes of trans-
port. J. Neurobiol. 58, 189–200.

Wang, Z., Khan, S., and Sheetz, M.P. (1995). Single cytoplasmic
dynein molecule movements: Characterization and comparison with
kinesin. Biophys. J. 69, 2011–2023.

Warshaw, D.M., Kennedy, G.G., Work, S.S., Krementsova, E.B., Beck,
S., and Trybus, K.M. (2005). Differential labeling of myosin V heads with
quantum dots allows direct visualization of hand-over-hand processiv-
ity. Biophys. J. 88, L30–L32.

Yildiz, A., Forkey, J.N., McKinney, S.A., Ha, T., Goldman, Y.E., and Sel-
vin, P.R. (2003). Myosin V walks hand-over-hand: Single ﬂuorophore
imaging with 1.5-nm localization. Science 300, 2061–2065.

Yildiz, A., and Selvin, P.R. (2005). Fluorescence imaging with one
nanometer accuracy: application to molecular motors. Acc. Chem.
Res. 38, 574–582.

Yildiz, A., Tomishige, M., Vale, R.D., and Selvin, P.R. (2004). Kinesin
walks hand-over-hand. Science 303, 676–678.

348 Cell 126, 335–348, July 28, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Inc.

